[Amit Varma]: One of my favorite quotes about writing comes from the great Susan Sontag, who said,
[Amit Varma]: quote, a writer is someone who pays attention to the world, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: Now, that might seem banal, don't we all pay attention to the world?
[Amit Varma]: The truth is that we don't, all of us tend to get drawn into a comfort zone, not just
[Amit Varma]: in terms of physical spaces, but also the mental maps we draw of the world, the frames
[Amit Varma]: of reference with which we see everything around us, even the universe of acceptable
[Amit Varma]: facts outside of which no facts matter.
[Amit Varma]: This is why art is so important.
[Amit Varma]: It can take us outside of ourselves, even into someone else's head in someone else's
[Amit Varma]: life.
[Amit Varma]: This is also why journalism and narrative nonfiction are so important.
[Amit Varma]: They can reveal a part of the world in such vivid detail that we come alive for a moment
[Amit Varma]: and see everything differently.
[Amit Varma]: This is why Tom Wolfe once said, quote, nonfiction is the most important literature to come out
[Amit Varma]: of the second half of the 20th century, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And in times which are so complex, when we are surrounded by such simplistic narratives,
[Amit Varma]: I would argue that we need nonfiction more than ever before to make sense of this world
[Unknown]: we live in.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: My guest today is Saman Subramanian, a journalist whose narrative nonfiction has appeared in
[Amit Varma]: publications like the New Yorker, the New York Times, the Guardian, Wired, Harper's,
[Amit Varma]: and many, many more.
[Amit Varma]: He is also the author of three acclaimed books, the most recent of which is a dominant character,
[Amit Varma]: the Radical Science and Restless Politics of J.B.S.
[Amit Varma]: Haldane.
[Amit Varma]: Samanth is also a legendary Indian quizzer, and he used to be my colleague at Crickin
[Amit Varma]: for around 17 years ago, which is so far back that if you wrote a book about it today, it
[Amit Varma]: would qualify as a book of history.
[Amit Varma]: I was eager to get him on the scene and the unseen to talk about his new book, and I also
[Amit Varma]: wanted to chat with him about an art he has mastered, the art of narrative nonfiction.
[Amit Varma]: So this episode is therefore an episode of two halves.
[Amit Varma]: The first is about writing, and the second is about Saman's book on J.B.S.
[Amit Varma]: Haldane, which is a fascinating study of a great scientist and a flawed human being.
[Amit Varma]: Before we get to a conversation, though, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoy listening to the scene and the unseen, you can play a part in keeping the
[Amit Varma]: show alive.
[Amit Varma]: The scene and the unseen has been a labour of love for me.
[Amit Varma]: I've enjoyed putting together many stimulating conversations, expanding my brain and my universe,
[Amit Varma]: and hopefully yours as well.
[Amit Varma]: But while the work has been its own reward, I don't actually make much money off the show.
[Amit Varma]: Although the scene and the unseen has great numbers, advertisers haven't really woken
[Amit Varma]: up to the insane engagement level of podcasts, and I do many, many hours of deep research
[Amit Varma]: for each episode, besides all the logistics of producing the show myself.
[Amit Varma]: Scheduling guests, booking studios, paying technicians, the travel, and so on.
[Amit Varma]: So well, I'm trying a new way of keeping this thing going, and that involves you.
[Amit Varma]: My proposition for you is this.
[Amit Varma]: For every episode of the scene and the unseen that you enjoy, buy me a cup of coffee, or
[Amit Varma]: even a lavish lunch, whatever you feel it's worth.
[Amit Varma]: You can do this by heading over to scene unseen.in slash support and contributing an amount of
[Amit Varma]: your choice.
[Amit Varma]: This is not a subscription.
[Amit Varma]: The scene and the unseen will continue to be free on all podcast apps and at scene unseen.in.
[Amit Varma]: This is just a gesture of appreciation.
[Amit Varma]: Help keep this thing going.
[Amit Varma]: Scene unseen.in slash support.
[Amit Varma]: Samanth, welcome to the scene and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Thanks, Samanth.
[Guest]: It's a pleasure to be here.
[Amit Varma]: Samanth, you know, before we get started and get to this book, let's talk a bit about sort
[Amit Varma]: of your personal life and your personal journey.
[Amit Varma]: You know, I've known you for a long time, we were, of course, colleagues at Quickenpho.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, so I've known you as a quizzer, as a writer, and as someone who's always also
[Amit Varma]: very interestingly thinking at a meta level about these things, and writing about them
[Amit Varma]: as well.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a bit about, you know, how you grew up, how did you become a quizzer?
[Amit Varma]: Were you a voracious reader?
[Guest]: What were your early influences like?
[Guest]: I think I was always a reader.
[Guest]: I mean, I started, I remember the first sort of book of quote, unquote, serious literature
[Guest]: that I read was Smith's Journalist by P.G.
[Guest]: Woodhouse, which somebody gave me back in the day, very sort of prophetically, I guess.
[Guest]: And I was, you know, until then, I'd been reading comic books and adventure novels like
[Guest]: the Hardy Boys, and this gave me a taste of what a real book could do and what real language
[Guest]: could do.
[Guest]: And I think that sort of hooked me.
[Guest]: And so throughout my childhood, that was what I did.
[Guest]: You know, I was not a very sporty kid.
[Guest]: I was asthmatic.
[Guest]: And so there was not a lot of activities I could pursue outside.
[Guest]: And so I would stay indoors and read.
[Guest]: And I think my quizzing sort of came out of that, because when I read, I found that I
[Guest]: was reasonably good at retaining what I read, but more importantly, I used to like to read
[Guest]: across genres, across topics, you know, not just fiction at the time, but, you know, nonfiction
[Guest]: of all kinds.
[Guest]: And I would even sort of, as the cliche goes, read the newspaper packets in which the roasted
[Guest]: peanuts were sold, when they were sold to you.
[Guest]: So, you know, I mean, I was that kind of reader.
[Guest]: And the quizzing, I think, started when I was in school, and I've just sort of never
[Guest]: given it up.
[Guest]: I think I started around the ninth grade in Chennai, where I was living at the time.
[Guest]: And it was just, it was such a sort of good community of people and such an interactive
[Guest]: activity at the time that I just, I decided I just wanted to do this all the time.
[Amit Varma]: Let's kind of talk a bit about quizzing.
[Amit Varma]: You wrote the superb piece on quizzing for the Guardian, which of course I link from
[Amit Varma]: the show notes, where at one point, you said, quote, whatever I'm doing at any point of
[Amit Varma]: the day, it's probably safe to assume that I would rather be quizzing, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And at another point, you say you drink to forget, you quiz to remember.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, one of the things I was struck by was how you referred to a friend of yours
[Amit Varma]: calling quizzing an act of bricolage, you know, a term that Levi Strauss used to talk
[Amit Varma]: about how, you know, different small ideas can be mixed and, you know, bring about something
[Amit Varma]: new, which seems to me to be both sort of a theme of, you know, a guiding philosophy
[Amit Varma]: of Haldane himself, and we'll get to the book shortly, but also something that also seems
[Amit Varma]: to drive you in the sense that the subjects that you've written on are very eclectic and
[Amit Varma]: varied.
[Amit Varma]: And it seems that even when you wrote about cricket, for example, you brought a lens to
[Amit Varma]: it, which was not necessarily off cricket, you've spoken about how, you know, when you
[Amit Varma]: wrote about cricket, you looked at it as a metaphor for bigger things.
[Amit Varma]: So it's almost, you know, as I said earlier, that you're kind of stepping back from every
[Amit Varma]: subject you're writing about, and you're applying all of these different things.
[Amit Varma]: Is that how you see yourself as well?
[Amit Varma]: And is that part of you know, what makes you a very good quizzer?
[Amit Varma]: And then what drives your writing that it's not just a subject you're writing about, you're
[Guest]: bringing everything to the table?
[Guest]: That's an interesting question.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: So there's two things here.
[Guest]: One is just what you might call in whatever limited form it is, my philosophy of writing
[Guest]: or of journalism.
[Guest]: And we can come to that later, because maybe there's more to be said about that.
[Guest]: But the second is just, as you put it, is this kind of magpie-like obsession and fascination
[Guest]: with small, interesting things.
[Guest]: And then also sort of a curiosity to see what all those things build into.
[Guest]: You know, I think a lot of this comes from people that you and I would both have read
[Guest]: when we were growing up.
[Guest]: You know, for example, in the 90s, still, for a lot of people, the archetypal cricket
[Guest]: writer was Cardus.
[Guest]: And Cardus famously was a music critic for the Manchester Guardian, even as he was a
[Guest]: cricket writer.
[Guest]: And he brought that same approach to his cricket writing, in my opinion.
[Guest]: He brought a knowledge of the world with him when he went into the stadium to watch.
[Guest]: And it was not just a question of analyzing the game for its own sake, but a question
[Guest]: of drawing bigger themes out of it.
[Guest]: I think that is interesting to me, because once you have perfected is too strong a word,
[Guest]: but once you become addicted to that approach, you can then apply it to anything.
[Guest]: You can kind of read and write about science, and you can draw these themes out.
[Guest]: You can look at sport, you can look at art and culture.
[Guest]: It's all in the process itself, the process of viewing, of regarding these subjects as
[Guest]: an outsider.
[Guest]: And the thing is that we will always be an outsider.
[Guest]: I mean, in cricket writing, for example, there is always the eternal conundrum of why people
[Guest]: who are not able to play a James Anderson delivery should be writing about how this
[Guest]: batsman out in the cricket field should be doing that.
[Guest]: We are not able to do it, why should we comment on it?
[Guest]: And I know a number of cricketers who have held this view in the past.
[Guest]: But I think to bring this particular philosophy of viewing and regarding and analyzing to
[Guest]: bear is to privilege that outsider-ness to a certain extent, and to privilege what the
[Guest]: outsider brings by way of insight and perception.
[Guest]: So I think that's where all of this comes from.
[Guest]: And bricolage is a part of that.
[Guest]: I mean, the quizzing is a part of that in the sense that you are reading about and learning
[Guest]: about secondhand or even thirdhand a lot of these topics.
[Guest]: But in your own particular way, they somehow add up into something, you know, a larger
[Guest]: answer, or if you're setting a question, a larger question, which is interesting in its
[Amit Varma]: own right in that particular moment.
[Amit Varma]: So I have a couple of larger questions relating to what you just said.
[Amit Varma]: But a couple of mundane things that I'm genuinely curious about that, you know, for the benefit
[Amit Varma]: of my listeners, I tell them that, you know, when Samant and I were colleagues at Cricken
[Amit Varma]: for long ago, and I hadn't heard of his quizzing prowess at the time, to me, he was just another
[Amit Varma]: young colleague.
[Amit Varma]: And there was a quiz we heard about in Mulund of all places.
[Amit Varma]: And our office was in Andheri.
[Amit Varma]: And we said, let's go and take part.
[Amit Varma]: So we went as a team in this rickety auto all the way to Mulund.
[Amit Varma]: And basically, what happened in the quiz was Samant answered every single question and
[Amit Varma]: just won it on his own.
[Amit Varma]: And everybody else, including me was kind of like a spectator after which, you know,
[Amit Varma]: I think one gentleman in the audience came to you and said, Are you that guy from Chennai,
[Amit Varma]: who wears a cap backwards?
[Amit Varma]: And it then turned out that you were a legend.
[Amit Varma]: And that was like an iconic image of you with that cap backwards and all that.
[Amit Varma]: So the mundane questions I sort of want to get out is regarding A, your reading habits
[Amit Varma]: and B, then your attention habits, because obviously, you know, all regular quizzers
[Amit Varma]: in the circuit that you are part of, and I was very briefly part of, not good enough
[Amit Varma]: to stay there for a while, all of us, you know, look askance at the notion that quizzers
[Amit Varma]: are just memorizing stuff and memorizing facts.
[Amit Varma]: So there is an element of that you've wrote in your Guardian piece about how Pat Gibson
[Amit Varma]: keeps Excel files, and you know, he'll have across categories, he'll give different files
[Amit Varma]: and note down up to 100 facts a day.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, most quizzers when they quiz, it's like a deductive process, you're bringing
[Amit Varma]: all your knowledge to bear and you're really working out problems as such.
[Amit Varma]: So my sort of two part question is that, what was the process of retention like barring
[Amit Varma]: the fact that you read very widely, did you also have to take specific efforts to make
[Amit Varma]: sure you remembered or categorized information?
[Amit Varma]: And apart from that, what was your reading like?
[Amit Varma]: And what is your reading like?
[Amit Varma]: How much would you read?
[Amit Varma]: How would you pick what you read?
[Guest]: There's a cultural difference here, actually, which is quite interesting.
[Guest]: And my, you know, I didn't have time to get into in my Guardian piece.
[Guest]: But it's it might be interesting for our listeners here, which is that in the US and in the UK,
[Guest]: quizzing is is about memorization and memory and retention to a far greater extent than
[Guest]: it is in India.
[Guest]: So you know, the Pat Gibsons of the world when they compete to compete in something
[Guest]: like the World Quizzing Championship, a lot of their prowess comes from having, you know,
[Guest]: created these databases and these lists of facts, which they then sort of revise almost,
[Guest]: it's very much a student like activity over here.
[Guest]: It's not like that in India, I feel I mean, India is my big theory about this is that
[Guest]: Indian quizzing has grown up as a reaction to Indian education, because Indian education
[Guest]: is already so steep in rote learning and memorization that Indian quizzing is like some form of
[Guest]: lateral thinking exercise that has grown up as a reaction to that.
[Guest]: And so in India, the quizzing revolves largely around what you might call the interesting
[Guest]: bit of trivia, the piece of information that sits at slightly odd angles to the rest of
[Guest]: the world.
[Guest]: And just because of that oddity, you remember it as soon as you read it.
[Guest]: I mean, it's just, it's not an effort to memorize it in any particular way.
[Guest]: And so I think I have never and I know a number of my friends and colleagues in the quizzing
[Guest]: world have never gone in for the pure retention exercise, I mean, the truth is definitely
[Guest]: that we all have possibly quite good memories, and we will remember a lot of what we read
[Guest]: because we read widely, we tend to just remember a lot of those things.
[Guest]: But that's never the it is the basis, but that is never the key.
[Guest]: The key to unlock a lot of these Baroque Indian quiz questions is a particular kind of lateral
[Guest]: thinking that kicks in, depending on the framing of the question.
[Guest]: And these facts that as I said, slip sit at slightly odd angles to the rest of the world.
[Guest]: So that is the charm of Indian quizzing, I feel.
[Guest]: And so retention is important, but secondary, in my opinion, in terms of importance.
[Guest]: My reading itself has tended to I mean, vary over the years, as all of us have experienced,
[Guest]: you know, I used to read a lot more fiction than I do now, to my regret, I went through
[Guest]: a phase, I think about five or six years ago, when I realized, you know, I kind of looked
[Guest]: back upon my calendar year, and I realized I had just not read that many books.
[Guest]: And this was, of course, again, something we've all experienced the profusion of the
[Guest]: internet and various other things.
[Guest]: And I was reading and I continue to read a lot of magazine pieces because of my own work.
[Guest]: And so that takes out a lot of my reading time.
[Guest]: And so I decided I would make a conscious effort to read more books.
[Guest]: For one year, I set a target of a book a week at least to read more challenging books, I
[Guest]: felt that habit had gone out of the window to sort of read books that maybe you have
[Guest]: to read passages two or three times to get the import of that.
[Guest]: So I started doing that.
[Guest]: And it's gone reasonably well.
[Guest]: Some months are better than others, you read a lot for work anyway.
[Guest]: So sometimes at the end of the day, the last thing you want to do is pick up yet another
[Guest]: book.
[Guest]: But the range is there, fortunately, and partly that this is because of the eclectic range
[Guest]: of topics that I work on for my journalism.
[Guest]: So you tend to read across subjects anyway, but then also, my own interests just lie in
[Guest]: different fields.
[Guest]: So I will look at book reviews and try to figure out what is new and interesting that
[Guest]: I might pick up.
[Guest]: So right now, for example, I'm reading this book by the philosopher Daniel Dennett called
[Guest]: Darwin's Dangerous Idea, which is an extremely dense and very, very rigorously thought out
[Guest]: piece of writing about how the idea of natural selection Darwin's idea of natural selection,
[Guest]: the world, but also sort of why it was dangerous in the sense of how it upset a lot of preconceived
[Guest]: notions about the world, and how those preconceived notions were put in place by the power structures
[Guest]: that were around in the 19th century.
[Guest]: And so how it was, quote, unquote, dangerous to all of these power structures, but it goes
[Guest]: far beyond that.
[Guest]: I mean, he goes into computer science and algorithms, and he goes into systems and how
[Guest]: systems and processes work.
[Guest]: It's very much a magpie like approach to evolution and natural selection, which is why I was
[Guest]: attracted to the book when I first read about it.
[Guest]: And it's definitely one of those extremely difficult books, because you have to kind
[Guest]: of immerse yourself in it for a month at least to get a sense of it.
[Guest]: And so obviously, in the middle of all of that, I will sometimes read as I did this
[Guest]: time, detective stories.
[Guest]: So I read A Perfect Murder by HRF Pete Keating, which I've been meaning to get to for a long
[Guest]: time.
[Guest]: So it's, it's, as I said, it's, it's varied and weird and quite whimsical sometimes.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I read Darwin's Dangerous Idea a few years ago and love as well as Consciousness
[Amit Varma]: Evolved, which is another book by him, which is sort of sitting right here, very rewarding,
[Amit Varma]: right?
[Amit Varma]: I just realized that, you know, one thing that kind of resuscitated my own reading habit
[Amit Varma]: was that when I started doing the podcast, I had to read a lot for research, often multiple
[Amit Varma]: books for a particular episode.
[Amit Varma]: And then just the practice of reading so many books for work also makes it easier to read
[Amit Varma]: it for leisure.
[Amit Varma]: And I guess that's the case with you also, as you said, but thought that strikes me.
[Amit Varma]: And this is something that came up in the last episode I recorded with Russ Roberts
[Amit Varma]: of Econ Talk fame as well.
[Amit Varma]: You know, is that how much the technology around us and the gadgets around us can change
[Amit Varma]: who we are as a people by changing our experience of how we imbibe knowledge.
[Amit Varma]: Like back in the day, if you're reading a book, you're taking a book, you're sitting
[Amit Varma]: down with it.
[Amit Varma]: And there isn't that much distracting you relatively.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, those lack of distractions also indicate why for so many decades test cricket was so
[Amit Varma]: popular in India.
[Amit Varma]: But today we are sort of surrounded by distractions and what these distractions inevitably mean
[Amit Varma]: is that we are constantly in a state of shallow skimming that we rarely have the time and
[Amit Varma]: the attentional bandwidth to be able to immerse ourselves in something.
[Amit Varma]: So a lot of people like I find that when I'm not actually sitting and reading a book, I'm
[Amit Varma]: not reading anything, you know, longest stuff on the internet or whatever, you know, it's
[Amit Varma]: just you're on social media, you're chasing different dopamine rushes, Twitter notifications
[Amit Varma]: or Facebook likes, and how you discover content is you're following links from here and there.
[Amit Varma]: And if you want to know something about a subject, you'll do a quick Google search and
[Amit Varma]: you might read a couple of articles in the Wikipedia page, but it's all incredibly shallow.
[Amit Varma]: And because the knowledge that we consume and which is our learning, therefore, is what
[Amit Varma]: shapes us as people, you know, would say either of us have been grown up to be different people
[Amit Varma]: if we were kids.
[Amit Varma]: Today, I don't know.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I'm just kind of thinking aloud.
[Guest]: Yeah, I mean, I always say the guy who has a lot to answer for in the history of technology
[Guest]: is a guy who invented the alt tab shortcut has basically kind of completely destroyed
[Guest]: us in that single stroke.
[Guest]: I don't know.
[Guest]: I mean, it's interesting, because, you know, 20 years down, we look at kids who grew up
[Guest]: today, we'll see the kind of work that they do.
[Guest]: I mean, in the sense of both creative work, because creative work, I think requires some
[Guest]: sort of sustained attention to what you're doing, but also other forms of work.
[Guest]: And maybe there's a, you know, you, for example, have been writing and thinking about TikTok
[Guest]: a lot.
[Guest]: And TikTok as a form of creativity is quite ripe for our age, right?
[Guest]: I mean, it's that short attention span.
[Guest]: But how creative you can be within those confines is something that I guess we will only find
[Guest]: out once all of this has reached a certain kind of fruition and maturity.
[Guest]: And we can look back upon it and assess it on its own terms.
[Guest]: I mean, right now, TikTok is mostly a diversion, sometimes a Chinese security threat, but not
[Guest]: yet kind of full fledged, creative form in its own right.
[Guest]: I mean, and we'll have to see what kind of creative fruit this bears.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, no, I'm a big fan of TikTok, because what all of this shallow surfing could also
[Amit Varma]: indicate is, it would enable a different kind of bricolage.
[Amit Varma]: But to sort of get back to the couple of questions I had, from what you said earlier, one is,
[Amit Varma]: you know, you often looked at cricket as a metaphor for other things.
[Amit Varma]: If you're writing about subject X, you'll also bring to bear upon it, a larger view
[Amit Varma]: of the world and of society and all of those things.
[Amit Varma]: And it strikes me that there is also a danger in that, for example, you've also spoken about
[Amit Varma]: how, I mean, all writers will speak about how you want to avoid cliched language.
[Amit Varma]: You've also said you want to avoid cliched ideas.
[Amit Varma]: And that's also important.
[Amit Varma]: And that's something that you're conscious of.
[Amit Varma]: And it strikes me that the danger of sort of, you know, having these different lenses
[Amit Varma]: through which you look at the world, and applying it to different things, the danger can also
[Amit Varma]: be that, you know, you have a bunch of hammers, and you apply one of them to every nail.
[Amit Varma]: And you're not kind of going beyond that.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, just as an example, thinking aloud, you know, if you look at something like the
[Amit Varma]: IPL, for example, depending on your ideology, you can come at the IPL either from a point
[Amit Varma]: of view of, oh, this is capitalist greed, and this is a corruption of what the spirit
[Amit Varma]: of the game is all about.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, longer cricket reveals character and blah, blah, blah.
[Amit Varma]: And you can bemoan the commercialization.
[Amit Varma]: If you come from another ideological lens, and you can talk about that, no, it empowers
[Amit Varma]: so many people and expands the reach of the game.
[Amit Varma]: And look, it's got women viewing the game.
[Amit Varma]: And so many more cricketers make money from the game and the incentives for kids coming
[Amit Varma]: into the game have changed for the better, and all of those things.
[Amit Varma]: And danger there is that, you know, whatever lens you bring to bear, it expands your view,
[Amit Varma]: because you're obviously not just looking at, you know, the sport alone or IPL alone,
[Amit Varma]: you're bringing other things to bear on it.
[Amit Varma]: But it can also constrict your view because it is a particular lens.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm assuming that as someone who's sort of taken a meta approach where you, you know,
[Amit Varma]: you don't just write, but you think about writing at a broader level, is this something
[Amit Varma]: that you've thought about?
[Amit Varma]: And is this something that you have to watch out for in yourself that, am I going in there
[Amit Varma]: with a particular lens or a preconceived narrative?
[Amit Varma]: And to what extent is it necessary?
[Amit Varma]: And to what extent would you need to watch out for it?
[Guest]: The fundamental truth is that I think everybody goes into everything with a preconceived lens.
[Guest]: We all know this already.
[Guest]: And so there is no such, the myth of the objective journalist has long been shattered and replaced
[Guest]: by hopefully the myth of the fair and at least balanced journalist.
[Guest]: But this would be a problem, I think, if I was an opinion writer.
[Guest]: I think if I was commenting on things and doing nothing but that, it would be a very
[Guest]: difficult thing because you would, as you say, only have a limited set of hammers that
[Guest]: you would bring to bear on everything that came before you.
[Guest]: As a journalist, I feel there is a deeper rigor, which is quite enjoyable, which is
[Guest]: that whatever lens or ideology it is that you bring to bear on something, it is then
[Guest]: your responsibility to go out and find quote-unquote proof of that.
[Guest]: You have to illustrate, you have to show, for example, how the IPL has empowered people,
[Guest]: who it has empowered, what their stories are, what are these stories of empowerment, where
[Guest]: did they come from and where have they come to?
[Guest]: If you think the IPL is a machine for corruption, you have to show how it is a machine for corruption,
[Guest]: what kind of hyper-capitalist excesses it indulges in and how it's distorting the game.
[Guest]: I find that there is where the power lies in the kind of work that I and many others
[Guest]: like to do, which is that it is not only a question of telling, it is a question of showing.
[Guest]: And it is not only a question of postulating, it is a question of then going out in some
[Guest]: limited way and proving.
[Guest]: And that is also where I can indulge my absolute love for narrative.
[Guest]: I mean just the fact that you can tell a story and through that story, these themes can sometimes
[Guest]: even be implicit.
[Guest]: You don't even need to sort of explicitly make them clear the way an opinion writer
[Guest]: might do.
[Guest]: This is also, by the way, why I have a huge amount of respect for people who write opinions
[Guest]: on a daily or a weekly basis, people like you and Mehr Sharma and many others, people
[Guest]: who are able to somehow sort of bring a certain freshness to each column and not make it seem
[Guest]: as if it is all a question of just looking at the world through these set of lenses.
[Guest]: I'm unable to do that for some reason.
[Guest]: And I think it's because perhaps I don't have as many opinions as I would like.
[Guest]: They are not as fleshed out as I would like.
[Guest]: But fortunately, my job gives me the liberty to feed my opinions and nurture them and nourish
[Guest]: them by going out and doing this kind of reporting.
[Guest]: And that is something that I think then I sort of transmit to the reader.
[Guest]: So there are a few cases in which I've gone into a story, not at least in my view, not
[Guest]: having a particularly strong opinion on it and coming out of it with a particularly strong
[Guest]: view.
[Guest]: There are many other instances where, as you say, I've gone in knowing what I think and
[Guest]: kind of looking at narratives that I think tell that larger truth.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, no.
[Amit Varma]: And in fact, I must at this point say that I found all your journalism and your book
[Amit Varma]: on Haldane and all that extremely fair and balanced and a model of how journalism should
[Amit Varma]: be done.
[Amit Varma]: And it also strikes me, you know, like you illustrated with the kind of questions that
[Amit Varma]: you brought up that different people chasing that IPL story from different angles might
[Amit Varma]: ask that, you know, the fact is that you can actually write that story from both points
[Amit Varma]: of view.
[Amit Varma]: You can find evidence of the grand corruption, you know, the degrading of the skills in the
[Amit Varma]: game, all of which will be true, but you can also find evidence of the empowerment and
[Amit Varma]: all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And to some extent, the choice of what material you gather, what angle you take, what questions
[Amit Varma]: you ask and who you ask those questions to also kind of shapes a piece.
[Amit Varma]: But I guess you've sort of already answered that.
[Amit Varma]: But, you know, for those of my listeners who might wonder, like, of course, no one is subjective.
[Amit Varma]: We all bring our own bags of biases to bear on anything that we do.
[Amit Varma]: But given that you made a distinction between objective on the one hand and fair and balanced
[Amit Varma]: on the other hand.
[Amit Varma]: So can you define fair and balanced a little bit?
[Guest]: You know?
[Guest]: Yeah, that's a good question.
[Guest]: And given that is actually, there's a lot of talk about what it means to balance a story
[Guest]: these days.
[Guest]: So in my view, fair and balanced is not so much a question of what the output looks like
[Guest]: as what the procedural aspect of journalism is.
[Guest]: So for example, if X has said something about Y, it is my responsibility as far as it is
[Guest]: possible to go to Y and ask him or her what they think about this and whether they would
[Guest]: like to say something in return.
[Guest]: Now, this, you know, this applies very much in the case of these cases where, you know,
[Guest]: it is about people talking about each other, which happens quite often in journalism.
[Guest]: The bigger debate in journalism that has come up now about balance is when you are tackling
[Guest]: things like climate change.
[Guest]: There is a huge resistance now to the fact that you have to be balanced when you're presenting
[Guest]: a new set of climate change data.
[Guest]: You have to also necessarily include on your panel of experts on TV or in your story as
[Guest]: a talking head, somebody who is a climate change denier.
[Guest]: That kind of balance, I think, is not what I'm talking about.
[Guest]: And it's something that we have increasingly come to learn is fruitless.
[Guest]: I mean, if there are 99.5% of scientists out there who think that climate change is real,
[Guest]: it is not incumbent upon you to seek out the other 0.5% and ask them and include their
[Guest]: views just for the sake of quote-unquote balance.
[Guest]: I don't think that's the kind of balance we're talking about here.
[Guest]: Fairness is probably a better word for it because then there is a responsibility that
[Guest]: comes upon the journalist to decide what is fair.
[Guest]: You know, fairness is subjective.
[Guest]: Again, everything is subjective.
[Guest]: Fairness also is.
[Guest]: And you have to decide whether if somebody has said something about a topic, whether
[Guest]: there is a value to be added to the story or a truth to be gained about the story by
[Guest]: talking to people from quote-unquote the other side.
[Guest]: I think that is, so it's a procedural thing that you wrestle with on a day-to-day basis
[Guest]: as you're reporting the story itself.
[Guest]: The output may or may not reflect it.
[Guest]: And this is where this whole notion of journalists being gatekeepers of these kind of narratives
[Guest]: comes into play.
[Guest]: Because as a journalist, you are actually deciding well before the story is out, what
[Guest]: is important and what is not, what truth is better reflected by what kind of writing and
[Guest]: what kind of quotes that you include.
[Guest]: But that is the job.
[Guest]: I mean, you know, and so you have to unfortunately hope that readers repose a certain amount
[Guest]: of trust in you and in the institution to be able to discern all these various aspects
[Guest]: of truth and fairness and objectivity and balance.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, fair point.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, another example of, for example, the quest for balance used to be, you know,
[Amit Varma]: in a subject that you've written about is when people used to insist that if you're
[Amit Varma]: talking to, you know, someone who believes in natural selection, you also must have an
[Amit Varma]: intelligent design guy out there, thereby implying an equivalence and that kind of balances,
[Amit Varma]: I mean, just nonsensical, you know, tell me a little bit about your process of writing
[Amit Varma]: nonfiction.
[Amit Varma]: And even before that, like, you know, of course, you went to the US in the late 90s to study
[Amit Varma]: journalism.
[Amit Varma]: And then you went again to Columbia to study IR after your crick and four stint.
[Amit Varma]: But before that, what shaped your ideas of what, you know, narrative nonfiction were
[Amit Varma]: because I remember, you know, growing up in India, as I did in the 80s and the 90s.
[Amit Varma]: You didn't really unless you were very privileged, which I have to accept I was, you didn't really
[Amit Varma]: get to read much great writing of this sort, you had access to a whole bunch of great books,
[Amit Varma]: but pre internet, you didn't really have access to great, long form journalism, you know,
[Amit Varma]: what was that process like of discovering what journalism can do?
[Amit Varma]: And you know, is your you know, desire to be a writer of narrative nonfiction, something
[Amit Varma]: that happened gradually, or did you know early on that that's the kind of writing you want
[Guest]: to know,
[Guest]: I had no idea, you know, like many other people, I think growing up in India in the 90s, I
[Guest]: had no exposure to any of these great writers and magazines that published narrative journalism.
[Guest]: I think, you know, when I went to study journalism, and after I came back for a long time, my
[Guest]: idea of what I wanted to do, what kind of journalism I wanted to was driven very much
[Guest]: by language.
[Guest]: And we go back again to, you know, the books that maybe all of us read in the 80s and 90s.
[Guest]: Growing up, you know, books where we came to admire literary style, a certain kind of
[Guest]: literary style.
[Guest]: For me, that was sort of the driver of, of good writing itself.
[Guest]: And that was the pillar of it.
[Guest]: And so this was one of the reasons why I got into cricket writing, for example, because
[Guest]: I thought cricket was the kind of arena that would allow a certain literariness to flourish.
[Guest]: I didn't realize at the time that the, you know, the era when you could be literally
[Guest]: in your cricket writing at long past for the most part, and that, you know, there was a
[Guest]: lot more sort of day to day journalistic rigor and stripped away language that went into
[Guest]: cricket writing in the early 2000s.
[Guest]: But I thought at the time that that is what I wanted to do.
[Guest]: And then I, you know, beyond, I tried a number of other things, you know, I, after I quit
[Guest]: Crick Info, I was a film critic for a little while.
[Guest]: And again, I thought that that was a way in which I could indulge my love of the language
[Guest]: itself.
[Guest]: I would write features for newspapers, I would write travel pieces.
[Guest]: But all of these were still sort of what you might call, you know, medium form journalism,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: Maybe 1000, 1500 words at the most.
[Guest]: And then I think in, this must have been around 2003 or 2004, which is when, you must also
[Guest]: remember this, the New Yorker famously decided that they would sell 80 years of archival
[Guest]: issues on a set of DVDs.
[Guest]: And I splashed out for one of those DVDs.
[Guest]: And they arrived by courier to my house in Chennai.
[Guest]: And I would, I just started sort of picking articles and writers at random and reading
[Guest]: off those DVDs, and I would simultaneously also read on these new websites that were
[Guest]: springing up Slate and Salon, all of these websites that were doing longer journalism.
[Guest]: I think even the New Yorker at the time had started to have a website where they put the
[Guest]: entire issue online.
[Guest]: So anyway, so I would read all of this stuff.
[Guest]: And I was entranced by this, because I think I felt here was a perfect marriage of all
[Guest]: of these things that I love, which is that a writer was not necessarily wedded to one
[Guest]: beat story after story.
[Guest]: There was a certain flexibility of structure, stories serve different functions, they went
[Guest]: into elements like character and plot and scene.
[Guest]: And importantly, for me, at least, is that there was a certain encouragement of imaginative
[Guest]: language, literary language.
[Guest]: When I read those stories, I think I felt as if I'd finally found a form in which I
[Guest]: could, which I wanted to occupy.
[Guest]: Now, from doing that to actually occupying it, it was like a completely different ball
[Guest]: game altogether involving a lot of luck.
[Guest]: But I think that was when, I think it was around 2004-2005, when I read these articles
[Guest]: on these DVDs, that I decided that if I wanted, for me at least, the ideal kind of journalistic
[Guest]: work that I wanted to pursue was that kind.
[Guest]: And it also, I think, suited, and this is a huge confession, but it also just suited
[Guest]: my own metabolism of work.
[Guest]: I had tried and completely failed at doing big journalism that requires you to pursue
[Guest]: the same topic day after day and write stories almost day after day, each story sort of an
[Guest]: expansion on the previous one, each story running at around 500 or 600 words.
[Guest]: I found I didn't enjoy it, I wasn't cut out for it.
[Guest]: The inherent problem is laziness, as it always is with me.
[Guest]: And so therefore, with this piece, or these kind of pieces, I felt that I had time, sometimes
[Guest]: months, to think and to read, and maybe sometimes not to think about it, to put it away for
[Guest]: a while and come back before I started writing it.
[Guest]: So when I realized all of these things, I think maybe that is around the time that I
[Amit Varma]: decided this is the kind of work I wanted to do.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, before we continue with the process, a brief digression, something I wonder what
[Amit Varma]: your thoughts are.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, you're a little younger than me, but we grew up around the same time, I think you're
[Amit Varma]: four or five years younger than me, perhaps, you know, so I teach this writing course online.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, one of the sort of bad habits I warn my students again, which is something
[Amit Varma]: that Indians especially seem to have internalized in their writing, is the use of these pompous
[Amit Varma]: phrases like instead of stop, they'll be like, put an end to and instead of now they'll be
[Amit Varma]: like at this moment in time.
[Amit Varma]: And always a use of, you know, bigger Latinate words with shorter Anglo Saxon words will
[Amit Varma]: do so, you know, like enable or fructify or even, you know, technical language like that.
[Amit Varma]: And one thought that struck me as I was saying that one, I have a feeling that this is more
[Amit Varma]: commonplace in India than elsewhere.
[Amit Varma]: But two, I think one reason for that, that I have speculated, and I wonder what your
[Amit Varma]: views are, is that part of it is because we carry this postcolonial baggage that English
[Amit Varma]: is a marker of class.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, one way of signaling how sophisticated you are, or where you stand in society is
[Amit Varma]: somehow showing, you know, quote, unquote, good English, and that includes showing bigger
[Amit Varma]: words and, you know, the mastery of phrases like this, a mastery of cliches, like I don't,
[Amit Varma]: you know, when we were both cricket writers in the early 2000s, one of the things that
[Amit Varma]: struck me was that a lot of the older cricket writers wore their mastery of cliches as a
[Amit Varma]: badge of pride.
[Amit Varma]: It was a feature, not a bug.
[Amit Varma]: It was a good thing to have a cliche for every occasion.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, so question number one, do you think that's kind of true?
[Amit Varma]: And question number two, is that something that in your own writing, did you see an evolution
[Amit Varma]: of the sort of writing which was I mean, on the one hand, of course, we were reading great
[Amit Varma]: books and reading great writers from abroad.
[Amit Varma]: But on the other hand, we were surrounded by this sort of language around us and in
[Amit Varma]: our newspapers.
[Amit Varma]: Is that something you have to consciously think about and fight against?
[Amit Varma]: Did your style evolve, you know, in a mindful way or did it sort of organically just to
[Amit Varma]: reading good writing become what it is?
[Guest]: No, I think you're definitely right.
[Guest]: In addition to the marker of class aspect that you mentioned, I think there is also
[Guest]: the question of, you know, the sort of lag with which we in India received a lot of what
[Guest]: you might call literature.
[Guest]: And so I think in the 80s and 90s, we were not yet at least I mean, not a lot of us at
[Guest]: any rate, we were not reading the kind of stripped away new journalism kind of thing.
[Guest]: I mean, you would read some Hemingway, but you would also often read a lot of 19th century
[Guest]: British literature and British literature was for it and it was ornate and you know,
[Guest]: so you would read that and you would kind of internalize those words and think that
[Guest]: they were just to be used in everyday writing, not realizing that time had in a sense passed
[Guest]: even in Britain.
[Guest]: And so I think that was, you know, one of the key drivers of this, the kind of literature
[Guest]: you read growing up in school as part of your non-detail exercises or whatever, was all
[Guest]: sort of from a particular era, it was set in stone, it was frozen in time.
[Guest]: And you internalize that in your classroom, and then you move out and you just continue
[Guest]: to think that that is a marker of good writing.
[Guest]: And of course, we all know that Indian bureaucrats, for example, still use a lot of pompous obfuscatory
[Guest]: jargon.
[Guest]: So you see that kind of stuff in government documents and releases, and that then makes
[Guest]: its way into the newspapers and Indian newspapers were for a long time notorious for the usage
[Guest]: of governmentese as well.
[Guest]: And so it was just all around you at that time, I felt.
[Guest]: And there was no internet to update you on how people were writing at this particular
[Guest]: moment in time in the 90s.
[Guest]: So that was, and it definitely, again, this is a question purely of privilege and nothing
[Guest]: else.
[Guest]: The fact that I was able to go away just after school for university to study journalism
[Guest]: and be exposed at what was still quite a formative age to people consider good writing.
[Guest]: And what is actually, I think, in my view, good writing, which is to strip away a lot
[Guest]: of the pomp around language.
[Guest]: I still haven't done it to the extent that I think a lot of my colleagues do.
[Guest]: I still do like a certain element of play in language, a certain inventiveness.
[Guest]: I will sometimes sort of use uncommon synonym for a common word, if I think it fits into
[Guest]: the rhythm of a sentence or if it fits into the context.
[Guest]: But what a lot of this did and what reading a lot of this did forced me to actively, consciously,
[Guest]: as you say, question how language works.
[Guest]: And when it is permissible or even desirable to use an uncommon synonym for a common word,
[Guest]: as I said.
[Guest]: Fractify may actually have a particular use and connotation in a particular sentence.
[Guest]: It is just a question of knowing when that is.
[Guest]: And knowing that those instances don't come by as often as you think they might.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, as you made this sort of shift towards, you know, longer writing, longer
[Amit Varma]: narrative nonfiction, and you in fact said that your comfort zone is in the seven to
[Amit Varma]: eight thousand word piece sort of what are the early memorable pieces that you remember
[Amit Varma]: and what are your learnings along the way there?
[Amit Varma]: You know, what would your process be like when you set out writing one of these?
[Guest]: I mean, between my reading of these and my writing of these, I think there was like a
[Guest]: good six year period, I mean, before I began to work on my first piece.
[Guest]: But I remember the among the first ones, the first pieces I read, there were a lot of,
[Guest]: you know, A.J.
[Guest]: Liebling, who was a New Yorker writer who wrote a lot on boxing, on food and on the
[Guest]: Second World War in France.
[Guest]: Again, eclectic range of subjects.
[Guest]: I remember reading him and enjoying him thoroughly because I think he was, he was sort of funny
[Guest]: and irreverent when it came to two out of these three subjects, he was quite serious
[Guest]: about boxing.
[Guest]: And, you know, he was, again, hugely inventive with the language in a way that has gone away
[Guest]: to a large extent in American journalism now, but was still back in the day in the 1930s
[Guest]: and 40s was still a feature of the journalism.
[Guest]: And I loved reading him.
[Guest]: And I remember buying a compendium of his book, of his articles and devouring that.
[Guest]: I remember reading a lot of Calvin Trillin, who was a food writer.
[Guest]: I read a lot of Joan Didion, her essays from California.
[Guest]: I mean, all of this stuff was introduced to me, again, in the early part of the 2000s,
[Guest]: either by people who I had gone to college with or people who had read these in the U.S.
[Guest]: and pressed them onto me.
[Guest]: And in all of these, I mean, I was just, I would read them almost and this is, again,
[Guest]: the sort of foundation of a particular kind of narrative journalism is that they should
[Guest]: read almost like fiction.
[Guest]: And so this is how I would read these pieces.
[Guest]: I mean, they were almost sort of fictive in their effect.
[Guest]: You could read them and not realize that you were reading nonfiction at all.
[Guest]: And that appealed to me enormously.
[Guest]: And so when it came time to write sort of my first piece, I think the first piece I
[Guest]: would have written in this vein was Profile of Lalit Modi for Caravan.
[Guest]: I think that was, you know, the first long piece I actively set out to do.
[Guest]: And, you know, so all of that, I mean, I was just like, wait, it was like an explosion
[Guest]: of desire to write these kind of pieces.
[Guest]: And, you know, all of these ideas and things I've been thinking about for the last six
[Guest]: or seven or eight years, all sort of came out, I think, in that 8000 word piece on Lalit
[Guest]: Modi, which came out in, I think, 2011.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, one of the things that is sort of notable about the Lalit Modi piece is,
[Amit Varma]: you know, which sort of marked it out from the sort of stuff you would read in India
[Amit Varma]: at that time, is the accretion of details, you know, in your very first para, you sort
[Amit Varma]: of quoted the Libchari and talking about how he's very fast with SMS, he has to think as
[Amit Varma]: fast as he types, which immediately, you know, gives you one little picture of the guy, then
[Amit Varma]: you talk about how he smokes a cigarette.
[Amit Varma]: So not just the tell of he would smoke ceaselessly, but even the show of he would begin a cigarette,
[Amit Varma]: drag on it a couple of times, and then toss it away as if, you know, all of that.
[Amit Varma]: So when you write a story, like if we talk about process now, and you begin work on a
[Amit Varma]: story, like I'm guessing there are two sort of distinct phases, and one is where you conceptualize
[Amit Varma]: a story and you start getting the material together.
[Amit Varma]: And the other would be when you actually sit down and write it.
[Amit Varma]: So at the stage when you start getting the material together, you know, what is your
[Amit Varma]: process like?
[Amit Varma]: Because I'm guessing here, you see, it seems as if you have to be simultaneously mindful
[Amit Varma]: of two different kinds of narrative elements.
[Amit Varma]: One is the key narrative of what is happening and what people have done and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And the other is you're also looking for these rich, vivid details, which can then make that
[Amit Varma]: work, you know, shine in a novelistic way, sort of to say, so how do you think about
[Amit Varma]: it?
[Amit Varma]: How do you go about it?
[Amit Varma]: You know, how do you take notes?
[Amit Varma]: I'm just very curious about that process.
[Guest]: Yeah, I mean, I feel like all of this has changed over time for me also.
[Guest]: I mean, the way I do it now is essentially, there's three phases, actually, there's sort
[Guest]: of the once the story has been pitched and accepted, we can get to pitching and accepting
[Guest]: later if that's like of interest to you.
[Guest]: But once it's been accepted, I then set out to do a whole bunch of reading.
[Guest]: That never used to happen before, I would just go out and start reporting immediately
[Guest]: because I thought that's what journalists did.
[Guest]: Now I think like I, you know, I buy a couple of books, I go online and read everything
[Guest]: that has already been written, right, I'm midway through researching a profile now and
[Guest]: I had to read three books, two of them were memoirs written by this guy before I even
[Guest]: could start.
[Guest]: So it is important when you go into that world, to be as prepared as you can be, which is
[Guest]: not something I thought much about earlier.
[Guest]: And then the second thing is, of course, this whole roster of interviews, the more the better
[Guest]: for Lalit Modi, I think I had like 30 or 40 interviews.
[Guest]: And it is difficult, it is surprisingly difficult to get people to describe Amit.
[Guest]: I don't know what your experience has been with this.
[Guest]: But when I, you know, when you ask them to describe a room, when you ask them to describe
[Guest]: a person's habits, when you ask them to describe what it is like to be around someone, or to
[Guest]: be in a particular place, I don't know whether it is, it's just that we have not learned
[Guest]: to do this as much as we should, or whether we don't pay attention to these details, or
[Guest]: whether we think they are not important when they tell the story of somebody like Lalit
[Guest]: Modi, it's more important to focus on his achievements and on his character.
[Guest]: So it was, you know, it's an enormous sort of challenge to draw this out of people.
[Guest]: I mean, there are some Americans, for some reason, tend to do this much better than anyone
[Guest]: else in the world.
[Guest]: I mean, they are immediately thinking in terms of almost cinematic terms, they will tell
[Guest]: you sort of, even if you want them to talk about the theme and their work, they will
[Guest]: tell that to you, they will narrate that to you in a story like fashion.
[Guest]: It's uncanny, almost uniformly, and no one else in the world, no other culture in the
[Guest]: world sort of managed to do that.
[Guest]: So in my opinion, what has usually worked is that you start off by allowing them to
[Guest]: talk about what they want to talk about, which is sort of how Lalit Modi built the IPL.
[Guest]: Well, first he did this, and then he did this, all of these details.
[Guest]: And you allow them to get that out of their system, almost.
[Guest]: And then you keep asking again, and at that point, having run out of things to say about
[Guest]: his work, they will then automatically reach for other things, the kind of details, scenes
[Guest]: that I want them to talk about, the personal tics and habits that make this guy go.
[Amit Varma]: How do you get the cigarette detail though?
[Amit Varma]: How he smokes?
[Amit Varma]: How did you get those details?
[Guest]: I can't for the life of me remember, but I think, I mean, you know, I would just ask,
[Guest]: I think that was part of a larger question when I asked about what he would do at the
[Guest]: stadium.
[Guest]: You know, what was he like to be at the stadium?
[Guest]: And so I think that is where whoever, I can't remember who it was, but was telling me about
[Guest]: how he would sort of constantly just be looking around him.
[Guest]: He would kind of be trying to direct all these operations at the same time, he would drop
[Guest]: into the celeb boxes and talk to them over there and smoke a cigarette.
[Guest]: And so it sounded to me like he was just like really keyed up all the time.
[Guest]: When I asked, I remarked on this.
[Guest]: And at that point, I think this person said, yeah, you know, I mean, even these cigarettes
[Guest]: that he kept smoking, he would never finish them.
[Guest]: He would just sort of toss them away after a couple of drags.
[Guest]: That's how keyed up he was.
[Guest]: So I mean, that is the kind of thing that you want ideally these people to say, and
[Guest]: it's very difficult to get them to say.
[Guest]: I have realized, and this is interesting because I was thinking about this yesterday in the
[Guest]: context of our upcoming interview, is that I have realized that very often people think
[Guest]: that these details bore the journalist, because I was thinking for often, for example, when
[Guest]: I was thinking yesterday, when I talked to Amit, what are the sort of things that he
[Guest]: would even want to know about a journalist process?
[Guest]: I mean, it must sound immensely boring to the average listener, and possibly even to
[Guest]: Amit, even though Amit is sort of a journalist himself in a sense.
[Guest]: But like, why would he want to know about the process of writing long form?
[Guest]: But then I realized this is exactly, maybe this is the kind of process that goes through
[Guest]: a person's mind.
[Guest]: And maybe that's why they decide these details are not important or to tell or even to register.
[Guest]: So you have to convince them that you are there, you have time for them.
[Guest]: And every time they let drop a morsel of detail, you bounce on it and show enthusiasm and say,
[Guest]: yes, yes, I want more like this.
[Guest]: And slowly, then these things emerge.
[Guest]: So it's often very often, it's a question of just getting to spend enough time with
[Amit Varma]: that person.
[Amit Varma]: What are your theories for why Indians are not so descriptive and Americans are, for
[Guest]: example?
[Guest]: I mean, even English, I mean, as I find now, when I'm living in England, I mean, even people
[Guest]: in England, it's very difficult to get them to describe.
[Guest]: With Americans, I don't know.
[Guest]: I mean, I have a number of theories, all of which are completely sort of speculative.
[Guest]: One is that they have grown up listening to talk radio and, you know, things like NPR
[Guest]: and NPR does this kind of storytelling, oral storytelling and oral storytelling at such
[Guest]: length that you know that you have to, that this is the way to tell a story.
[Guest]: Maybe it's the influence of Hollywood, where you think in sort of a cinematic way, right
[Guest]: from your childhood.
[Guest]: There is just a certain kind of discursiveness about that conversation, even on a day-to-day
[Guest]: basis when you're not interviewing anyone that I have not found anywhere else.
[Guest]: It's quite remarkable.
[Guest]: I would do, I was a co-host for a time of this podcast called The Intersection, which
[Guest]: is a science podcast.
[Guest]: And, you know, the idea was to get scientists to tell stories, not just to describe their
[Guest]: work and analyze their data for you on the podcast, but to also talk about how they set
[Guest]: about researching this and what kind of themes they're interested in and so on, and tell
[Guest]: stories about their own lives.
[Guest]: And again, invariably, it was so difficult to get non-American scientists.
[Guest]: It's definitely, there's an essay or at least a column in there somewhere for someone.
[Amit Varma]: And at some point, I hope you write it.
[Amit Varma]: That's really fascinating.
[Amit Varma]: So when you gather material, are you also forming the narrative in your head or is that
[Amit Varma]: a process that comes later, you know, Joan Didion once said, quote, I don't know what
[Amit Varma]: I think until I write it down, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And she would, I guess, perhaps have been speaking more in the context of personal essays
[Amit Varma]: and so on, where you're sort of working out your thoughts as you kind of get into those.
[Amit Varma]: So what's that process like?
[Amit Varma]: Like I imagine you get into a story fairly open, you have some notions of the angles
[Amit Varma]: you want to tackle, but you know, when does it start to fractify, if I may use that term?
[Guest]: You may definitely use that term, it's completely appropriate.
[Guest]: It's, so you go into a story, not with, at least for one of these big stories, you go
[Guest]: not so much with angles as with what one of my editors like to call themes, which is that
[Guest]: you have ostensibly one surface narrative, a surface story, but then you have three or
[Guest]: four layers below that.
[Guest]: And obviously listeners can't see the thing I'm doing with my hands here, but I'm kind
[Guest]: of sandwiching them one below the other, but these layers that operate at a level below
[Guest]: the main plot or the main story, and those themes sort of weave in and out of the piece
[Guest]: as you tell it.
[Guest]: And I think the craft, the only craft worth talking about in writing long form journalism
[Guest]: is how you weave the main plot and the themes in and out of each other.
[Guest]: That is basically the only thing you have to do when you sit down to write.
[Guest]: And so when I go into a story, most often I know the theme, sometimes I discover new
[Guest]: themes as they're coming up and as I'm interviewing people, and so I will kind of replace one
[Guest]: with the other, but then I will essentially, and as the reporting goes on, and this is
[Guest]: a matter of months in many cases, my reporting, my interviewing will get more and more pointed,
[Guest]: my reading will get more and more pointed.
[Guest]: So I will stop seeking out some kind of sources because I think they possibly can't speak
[Guest]: to the themes that I want to pursue and I will look more for another kind.
[Guest]: My questions get more, revolve more and more around these themes until I feel there's one,
[Guest]: there's a great piece of advice in a book on journalism called the New New Journalism,
[Guest]: where somebody says, you keep reporting until you see yourself coming the other way, by
[Guest]: which I mean that the minute you know that you already have a more detailed answer in
[Guest]: your mind to what this guy has just given you, you can kind of stop reporting at that
[Guest]: point because you feel like maybe there is, maybe you keep it going to get some more anecdotes
[Guest]: and color and so on.
[Guest]: But basically the information that you have is all mostly there.
[Guest]: But that takes a long time, there's thousands and thousands of words of notes.
[Guest]: I always these days tape record wherever I can so that I can take notes about other things,
[Guest]: you know, which includes follow up questions that have just stuck me or the scene that
[Guest]: we're setting in or whatever that might be or what this guy is like.
[Guest]: And then I come back and at that point is when you kind of sit down and you put a structure
[Guest]: down and you kind of, so I have right now next to me actually I have a legal pad on
[Guest]: which I have a structure for this profile I'm writing and in the top right hand corner
[Guest]: I have teams and I have a list of four teams, which is profile itself the guy who I'm profiling
[Guest]: but then the second team is locked down over the last three or four months, third team
[Guest]: is fast bowling because it's a profile of cricketer and the fourth team is longevity.
[Guest]: So you know these kind of like things that I want to pursue as ideas in the piece that
[Guest]: will go in and out of this story and then you structure it according to that and you
[Guest]: kind of keep wondering how you can bring these things to the surface occasionally again.
[Guest]: The thing with long-form journalism also is that it isn't always a question of just saying
[Guest]: this happened and he said this then she said this and then this happened again it is also
[Guest]: sometimes a question of inserting in your own voice your own idea about what is happening
[Guest]: and so you need you know a definite take on some of these themes that you will then put
[Guest]: in there at some point and that's kind of the joy of it it's an intensively subjective
[Guest]: form.
[Guest]: It is never meant to be objective in fact objectivity in long-form journalism I think
[Guest]: would be intensely boring.
[Guest]: The whole point is to have a narrative and the whole point is to have it be subjective.
[Amit Varma]: That's quite fascinating.
[Amit Varma]: You know how is in the writing process like you've gathered all the material, the themes
[Amit Varma]: have sort of fructified as we've gone along and actually how do you discipline yourself
[Amit Varma]: during the writing process?
[Amit Varma]: I think the key problem most writers find is discipline and you've spoken about how
[Amit Varma]: you know without a deadline you wouldn't get anything done so having said that you've written
[Amit Varma]: a bunch of books so clearly you know those don't have such concrete deadlines usually
[Amit Varma]: so you've managed that but how do you kind of discipline yourself?
[Amit Varma]: Do you write first thing in the morning?
[Amit Varma]: You know what are the challenges you faced just in that process of getting things written?
[Guest]: Yeah I mean I write very slowly you know if I write 500 words a day I consider it a job
[Guest]: well spent.
[Guest]: I try as much as possible to write first thing in the morning.
[Guest]: It doesn't always work out that way you know today for example we're doing our interview
[Guest]: at 6.30 in the morning my time so I'll only get to writing maybe later in the afternoon
[Guest]: but I try as much as possible when I'm working on something to do this 500 words a day thing
[Guest]: you know if I do 600 it's a bonus.
[Guest]: The thing that was really difficult was when I was doing long form I mean it's easy to
[Guest]: discipline yourself to that.
[Guest]: I think that real difficulty came about when I was working on books in parallel with these
[Guest]: pieces.
[Guest]: I needed the pieces to make a living and I had to write the book because there was still
[Guest]: a deadline for it and I wanted to do it and so that would involve sort of writing 500
[Guest]: words of the book in the morning and then setting that aside and doing another 500 words
[Guest]: of whatever piece I was working on in the evening and that's quite exhausting.
[Guest]: I mean I think once you've done that for a year by the end of the year you are ready
[Guest]: to take a few months off and not do anything.
[Guest]: So that was it.
[Guest]: I mean I think like I think with the journalism itself once the structure is down the structure
[Guest]: is key once you have the beginning and maybe the end cracked it sort of it tends to flow
[Guest]: I mean and then you just kind of obsess over things like what word to use in this sentence
[Guest]: and you know that kind of thing you are free to then devote yourself to the hearty part
[Guest]: of the writing process which is just a selection of words and the rhythms of the sentence and
[Guest]: how they sound.
[Amit Varma]: So you know a final question before we get off the writing process and actually get to
[Amit Varma]: your wonderful new book is sort of you make a living doing long form journalism and doing
[Amit Varma]: journalism and you write for The Guardian, The New Yorker and all of these people.
[Amit Varma]: Now you know it's sort of a dual question.
[Amit Varma]: One and both parts of the question really relate to voice.
[Amit Varma]: One is that over time have you developed a particular journalistic voice or is it something
[Amit Varma]: that shifts from piece to piece depending on your writing on I mean can someone pick
[Amit Varma]: up a piece and say oh only someone could have written this or that this is so typically
[Amit Varma]: him or can you you know switch depending on the needs of the subject that's part one and
[Amit Varma]: part two and something that struck me because a decade and a half back I used to write op-eds
[Amit Varma]: for the Wall Street Journal and a couple of others and one of the things that struck me
[Amit Varma]: about writing for foreign publications is that the cultural difference between you and
[Amit Varma]: your editor also applies to how you look at your writing.
[Amit Varma]: So one thing for example that you have to do for those guys is that you need to explain
[Amit Varma]: things which the Indian reader would take for granted and therefore you need to simplify
[Amit Varma]: slash dumb it down and that really became an irritating process because if you're for
[Amit Varma]: example talking about the BJP you don't always want to say comma the Hindu Nationalist Party
[Guest]: which came to power in 2014.
[Guest]: That's amazing.
[Guest]: That's always the example that I use also when I'm talking about how frustrating it
[Guest]: is and how I never want to write another piece about Modi again because you have to find
[Guest]: some short brief but effective way of talking about 2002.
[Guest]: You know that is the most annoying thing you know so there are many reasons why 2002 should
[Guest]: not have happened but one of the reasons is that you have to keep summarizing it in a
[Amit Varma]: sentence before moving on to what he's doing now.
[Amit Varma]: A very specific answer that it was also among the many other things that it did wrong it
[Amit Varma]: was a bane for writers who occasionally write for foreign publications.
[Amit Varma]: To complete the second part of the question then how does that affect your voice and can
[Amit Varma]: that process get frustrating like do editors in these places or you know are they trying
[Amit Varma]: to fit your piece into a particular kind of house style or their conception of how a good
[Amit Varma]: piece should be or you know of course you're someone who's been writing for so many years
[Amit Varma]: and you know you're a trusted and recognized writer do you get a certain amount of leeway
[Guest]: with language and voice?
[Guest]: Okay the first part of your question was about voice across publications and so it does change
[Guest]: a lot I mean you know the New Yorker has a very distinctive house style that very few
[Guest]: people who write for the magazine and the website are allowed to break on a regular
[Guest]: basis you know I mean first of all New Yorker geeks who are listening to this you know Anthony
[Guest]: Lay in the movie clearly has a very distinctive style you know a writer like Nick Palmgarten
[Guest]: who writes quite often has a very distinctive style but for many others you would only have
[Guest]: to you know if you blocked out the byline and you read the rest of the piece you would
[Guest]: guess who wrote the piece only by what it deals with so if it's a law piece you know
[Guest]: it is written by Jeffrey Toobin and if you know if it's like a deep state piece it's
[Guest]: a Jane Mayer piece and so on so and whereas and it's a cultural thing also in the sense
[Guest]: that so from the New York Times magazine is a little bit more flexible Harper's as a magazine
[Guest]: is still more flexible it's a cultural thing across the Atlantic that British publications
[Guest]: allow you a lot more leeway and sort of playfulness with your language and your structure but
[Guest]: even in that the Guardian Longreads is a little bit more American than say 1843 which is the
[Guest]: features magazine of the Economist so it varies from publication to publication and you have
[Guest]: to also temper your voice to suit the subject you know a piece like quizzing piece which
[Guest]: is partly a personal essay has it's a lot more flexible than a piece would be if it
[Guest]: was about say I mean I wrote a piece on fair trade which is for the Guardian Longreads
[Guest]: which is a very sort of intense quite detailed subject about a particular kind of niche in
[Guest]: the industry and you have to there's very little flexibility over there you know but
[Guest]: the personal essay is a lot more flexible and so so you do learn over time to tweak
[Guest]: each article according to who's publishing it and how and what it addresses now having
[Guest]: said that there is still I think underlying all of that there is still or there should
[Guest]: be a voice which is particular to me and unique to me and I don't know whether it is a case
[Guest]: that somebody will read a piece and know instinctively that it was written by me that is for readers
[Guest]: to say in a sense but I think in my mind at least when I set out writing a sentence for
[Guest]: the most part it is still the same kind of approach that I take to it and so I and the
[Guest]: words that I use and the kind of structures that I use you know for example I use a lot
[Guest]: of semicolons and em dashes you know that is just a linguistic kind of tick in my writing
[Guest]: that never goes away whatever I'm writing about I love things like interleaving dialogue
[Guest]: between thick passages of text you know wherever that is possible I will do it and so there
[Guest]: are these things that make up I love texture so texture of prose itself is such that you
[Guest]: know it's almost like a visual thing on the page when you're looking at a page you don't
[Guest]: necessarily just see you know three equally sized blocks of text you sometimes see big
[Guest]: blocks small blocks just a standalone quote sometimes how much you use quotes and where
[Guest]: you use quotes all of this stuff is tailored to what I like to read and how I like to read
[Guest]: and so therefore I think it reflects in what you might call a voice we were talking earlier
[Guest]: I think we'd put it off for a later part of the podcast but this is probably a good time
[Guest]: to bring it up which is that the whole philosophy behind this kind of journalism at least for
[Guest]: me is you have a certain set of tools and you are like a handyman you can go out and
[Guest]: you can quote unquote fix or address practically any topic out there given time you know you
[Guest]: have taught yourself how to read deeply and how to talk to people and know whom to interview
[Guest]: and then what kind of questions to ask them and what kind of detail you want to put into
[Guest]: your story and then you have learned how to synthesize all of this and assimilate it in
[Guest]: your own mind and then craft a story a narrative out of it this is a limited like Liam Neeson
[Guest]: I have a small but limited set of tools but they are effective and the philosophy is that
[Guest]: you should be able to go out and apply these to any subject out there whether or not you
[Guest]: are a newcomer to that subject and this is why I enjoy doing this kind of work which
[Guest]: ranges across subject matter both in my books and in journalism because every time I do
[Guest]: one more of these pieces it kind of strengthens my belief that really the set of tools is
[Guest]: immensely useful and I love the I just adore the idea of being able to apply it to anything
[Guest]: in my work I think that's sort of the thing that keeps me going on a day-to-day basis
[Amit Varma]: why did you call it a limited set of tools why is it because the form itself obviously
[Guest]: like every form this form also has certain limitations I mean you know for example I'm
[Guest]: not an imaginative person in the sense that a novelist is imaginative you know so I don't
[Guest]: have you know a word building sense I have a world discovering sense you know so that
[Guest]: and a lot of these set of tools is limited because they are quite functional tools also
[Guest]: like how to structure a piece is like a very specific skill that you will use only in this
[Guest]: field and nowhere else so that's why I called it small and limited but effective in this
[Guest]: particular field as I said they are functional things that maybe people outside this field
[Guest]: would not even care or have heard about but here it's sort of for some reason it finds
[Amit Varma]: its own intense utility so you know when I teach my writing class I often sort of talk
[Amit Varma]: about the difference between strategy and tactics where strategy is sort of the approach
[Amit Varma]: you bring to a particular piece of writing or it could be your overarching writing philosophy
[Amit Varma]: and tactics are of course all of these little tools of the language you know the paragraphs
[Amit Varma]: and the punctuation and the ways in which you manipulate rhythm and the music of it
[Amit Varma]: and all of that those are tactics so you know at a strategic level obviously part of your
[Amit Varma]: strategy would be dictated by what you're trying to do in a specific piece who you're
[Amit Varma]: writing it for and all of that but another part could be sort of an overarching writing
[Amit Varma]: philosophy that you have set for yourself is there something like that which you used
[Amit Varma]: to you know guide what kind of writing you are going to do I mean as far as possible
[Guest]: I think this you know this I have still not lost my fascination with making a piece of
[Guest]: writing as fictive as possible by which I mean it still has the effect of fiction it
[Guest]: is as I said not always possible it's more possible with some pieces than with others
[Guest]: but insofar as it is possible I want to give the reader an easy and organic reading experience
[Guest]: you know in a lot of these long reads these long form pieces very often it is necessary
[Guest]: to encapsulate a set of difficult ideas in prose that might be jargony you know because
[Guest]: the nature of the subject is such although you try to mitigate that as much as possible
[Guest]: it is necessary to be abstract maybe even sort of talk about ideologies in this weird
[Guest]: abstract vein a lot of people have no problem reading that but I know a lot of people do
[Guest]: I for one do I mean I am always much better when I'm reading things that are set in the
[Guest]: concrete world that kind of have an underlying message or idea rather than having those ideas
[Guest]: expressed as sentences you know abstraction set in words so but this is from one of the
[Guest]: reasons why I find it really difficult to read lengthy political analysis that is completely
[Guest]: diverse from what is actually happening in the real world you know I so in my mind what
[Guest]: I want to do is to avoid that as much as possible to give the reader an easy way into a lot
[Guest]: of this material and that inevitably involves sort of doing things like presenting characters
[Guest]: setting scenes having dialogue almost sort of it's sort of you know a spoonful of sugar
[Guest]: to make the rest of it go down more easily I think that is more than anything else the
[Guest]: guiding philosophy for me and it's do again it's determined entirely by what I find easy
[Amit Varma]: to read and difficult yeah I want to explore the use of your word a fictive there like
[Amit Varma]: I'm presuming you can mean a you know one of a couple of things one is that like you
[Amit Varma]: just said you make it more vivid so you avoid the abstract and you go for the concrete so
[Amit Varma]: you won't talk about say quote-unquote the great crisis of migrant labor having to walk
[Amit Varma]: through highways instead you you know you look for an image like a woman pulling a suitcase
[Amit Varma]: and her little three-year-old child is on that and you make that with it that is one
[Amit Varma]: of the possible interpretations I'm drawing from it and the other one is that you have
[Amit Varma]: deeper layers you build like in a novel you'd have sort of a universe of things and not
[Amit Varma]: just one narrative not just one sort of linear narrative and I guess long form nonfiction
[Amit Varma]: also gives you the scope to do that to have these different layers as you pointed out
[Guest]: so are these two things what you mean by fictive they're both I mean they're both what I mean
[Guest]: by fictive you're right I mean to present somebody the essence of what it's like to
[Guest]: read fiction but to have it be fact which involves sort of creating a little mini universe
[Guest]: for the reader populating with real people with real settings with real occurrences one
[Guest]: of my editors has a nice phrase which is that over a long read you should somehow be able
[Guest]: to convey the passage of time in some sense or the other and that is important I think
[Guest]: because I think people move through time events happen over time and so to even have that
[Guest]: happen is a novelistic thing I think and this populating with real people thing I think
[Guest]: is something that is often underlooked I mean with one of my editors in particular we have
[Guest]: intense and enjoyable differences of opinion on how much a real person should be focused
[Guest]: on as a person rather than as just as a vehicle or a carrier for ideas and themes my own view
[Guest]: always is that I think people read about people and they are interested in other people and
[Guest]: through that they will then assimilate in a much more effective way the things that
[Guest]: you're trying to convey whereas his view is that that you know you should just sort of
[Guest]: describe the person only in so far as it's necessary but then to actually beyond that
[Guest]: just have him or her be a name that occurs in the rest of the piece as you are trying
[Guest]: to explain certain things so it's you know these philosophies are quite enjoyable they
[Guest]: differ from publication to publication editor to editor journalist to journalist and it's
[Amit Varma]: nice to talk about these things and discuss them so you know we'll move into a commercial
[Amit Varma]: break now and after that come back and talk about your book on JBS I'll then but before
[Amit Varma]: we do that you know for people who are interested in writing for people who are interested in
[Amit Varma]: long-form journalism you know one do you have any advice to share on maybe what you've learned
[Amit Varma]: through your journey of all these years like if someone was to ask you that okay over the
[Amit Varma]: last 20 years what have you learned about writing what are the big lessons or even what
[Amit Varma]: are the things you wish you knew 20 years ago and thought about I think I have only
[Guest]: recently come to really appreciate the power of structure of an outline before you set
[Guest]: out to write for a long time I did it without an outline or I would just sort of have section
[Guest]: one is about X section two is about Y section three is about Z I would not actually break
[Guest]: those sections down further for myself and I do it now to the extent that I know what
[Guest]: each paragraph in each section will address that is obviously fluid as you're writing
[Guest]: because sometimes what looks good on a structure and an outline does not look good on the page
[Guest]: once you've started writing it so it's it's subject to change but I think that is something
[Guest]: I think is is important I think the thing I've done a lot more off over the last few
[Guest]: years is reread pieces four or five times and you know the first and second time maybe
[Guest]: this is not my own pieces these are pieces that I admire and deeply appreciate the first
[Guest]: and second time I will still be reading it almost as if I am a regular reader but in
[Guest]: the third and fourth time I will actually take pen and paper and I will start breaking
[Guest]: things down trying to understand for myself how these various things interlock with each
[Guest]: other what this section is doing and why this particular writer started with an image like
[Guest]: this which then moves on to a nut graph of this kind which is then exemplified by the
[Guest]: scene that comes next you know all of these things you know why this character pops up
[Guest]: here and not there these things I think I've started understanding in a deeper way only
[Guest]: over the last five or six years as I've started doing this exercise of breaking these pieces
[Guest]: down of reading them again and again and I think that is something that I think all writers
[Amit Varma]: could stand to learn from and about and other pieces which are like you know models to you
[Amit Varma]: of you know which you think you learned a lot from or you would present as a model of
[Guest]: what long form narrative nonfiction is capable of I mean there are models in each genre and
[Guest]: field I guess so like to list them would be tough but I mean one of the things I use in
[Guest]: my own writing workshops and and classes is a profile of the chef Mario Batali by the
[Guest]: writer Bill Buford which is a long piece and eventually then went on to become the basis
[Guest]: for a book a very fine book but it is a perfect example of what I'm talking about which is
[Guest]: that you know Mario Batali is this intensely larger-than-life sensuously inclined kind
[Guest]: of chef in New York an Italian chef and you know Bill Buford sort of tweaks his language
[Guest]: to suit the subject and so the first paragraph is a long and deeply detailed scene of what
[Guest]: happens when Mario Batali once came over to his house to cook for his guests and what
[Guest]: that is like and the kind of excesses that Mario is prone to and you know it just it
[Guest]: strikes me as a piece that gives you this deep insight into a person populates his world
[Guest]: describes what the kind of spaces are that he moves through why he is the way he is and
[Guest]: what it is like to be in his presence I think there are very few pieces I think that convey
[Guest]: better what a person is like if you were to meet him and that is something that I'm always
[Guest]: trying to do with you know my profiles as well because that's the whole idea it has
[Guest]: this great sense of how to use detail how to accrete it and how to deploy it in the
[Guest]: language is also in a sense slightly larger than life but in a good way because it suits
[Guest]: the subject whereas if this was the same thing if you were writing about a much more sober
[Guest]: restrained person maybe you wouldn't quite write the same way so it's it's something
[Guest]: I talk about often in my classes and I kind of break down how the piece works for people
[Guest]: who are sitting in my classes to learn and I maybe that's something that people want
[Amit Varma]: to check out on this podcast I'll link that from the show notes let's take a quick commercial
[Amit Varma]: break and on the other side we shall meet the fascinating JBS Alden
[Amit Varma]: Are you one of those people who not only loves to read but also wants to write better if
[Amit Varma]: so I have something for you since April this year I've been teaching an online course called
[Amit Varma]: the art of clear writing four webinars spread out over four Saturdays in which I share whatever
[Amit Varma]: I've learned about the craft and practice of writing over 25 years as a professional
[Amit Varma]: writer the course also contains many writing exercises discussions on email and whatsapp
[Amit Varma]: and much interactivity it costs rupees 10,000 or 150 dollars you can check out the details
[Amit Varma]: at indiancut.com slash clear writing this link will be in the show notes if you want
[Amit Varma]: to bridge the gap between the thoughts in your head and the words on the page then the
[Amit Varma]: art of clear writing might be just what you need August batches begin on Saturday August
[Amit Varma]: 1 so hurry and register before then indiancut.com slash clear writing
[Amit Varma]: welcome back to the scene in the unseen I'm chatting with Saman Subramaniam about his
[Amit Varma]: book a dominant character about JBS Haldane what what drove you to this interesting figure
[Amit Varma]: because you know you've been a cricket writer you studied international relations at Columbia
[Amit Varma]: there are so many things you could have and there are so many things you do write about
[Amit Varma]: and your journalism has so many eclectic subjects why Haldane how did you arrive at him ironically
[Guest]: I think perhaps for the first time I'd heard about him was in a quiz many years ago and
[Guest]: then I kind of looked him up a little bit online and even his even if you read his basic
[Guest]: Wikipedia bio so it's a very fascinating read I mean the kind of work that he did but also
[Guest]: the kind of life that he led it was a really sort of larger than life so to speak and it
[Guest]: seemed to straddle all of these worlds that I found myself interested in I mean he was
[Guest]: a scientist and I have been interested in science for a long time but also he was intensely
[Guest]: politically committed he lived an adventurous life in the sense that he fought in the trenches
[Guest]: in the first world war he went to Spain during the civil war he did sort of research on himself
[Guest]: for the British admiralty in the second world war and then he had this Indian connection
[Guest]: of course although it wasn't necessarily because of that that I latched on to him but I found
[Guest]: it interesting that he came to India and lived the last seven odd years of his life and died
[Guest]: here to the extent that he became an Indian citizen and that movement itself we are always
[Guest]: familiar with movements in the reverse direction scientists leaving India to go overseas and
[Guest]: so I thought it might be an interesting life through which to examine these intersections
[Guest]: of science and politics science and society and also to examine his particular milieus
[Guest]: in that time in the first half of the 20th century that is the explanation that I would
[Guest]: give from the point of view of Haldane himself but then the second thing which is diverse
[Guest]: of Haldane in a sense is that you know I had written a bunch of profiles by the time I
[Guest]: started working on this book and I was intensely curious to see whether I could write a biography
[Guest]: so a form that has fascinated me and that I read a lot of and it seems to be an extension
[Guest]: of the profile although as I realized isn't exactly and then all my journalism until now
[Guest]: has been structured around places that I can go to and people who I can meet I depend on
[Guest]: my being in a particular place to make things vivid for the reader which was definitely
[Guest]: the case with my first two books and I wanted to see almost as a kind of experiment of form
[Guest]: how you would pursue and achieve that kind of vividness if you were not in a place if
[Guest]: you were not able to talk to people if you had to rely purely on archival and documentary
[Guest]: material to present your scenes and your character so it was sort of mini challenge that I set
[Guest]: up for myself and Haldane seemed to be sort of a good way to do that partly because he
[Guest]: himself wrote a lot so there's a lot that you can glean from his own materials and writings
[Guest]: but then secondarily he lived through such interesting and widely described times you
[Guest]: know the first world war the second world war that there's a multiplicity of sources
[Guest]: you can consult to then synthesize all of that and make a vivid scene out of it something
[Guest]: that can hopefully come alive in the mind of the reader and these were the two reasons
[Amit Varma]: I guess that I was drawn to Haldane as a subject so you know when I think of the biographies
[Amit Varma]: I love and I loved your biography of Haldane you know one book which I spoke about on a
[Amit Varma]: recent episode and I really loved was Robert Caro's A Power Broker and one of the main
[Amit Varma]: reasons I loved that was it works at so many different levels it is a life story of one
[Amit Varma]: man yes but it is also in a sense a biography of New York City it's a study of how power
[Amit Varma]: corrodes character it's a study of how political economies evolve over a period of time it's
[Amit Varma]: a study of competing ideologies when you you know look at the battle between Moses and
[Amit Varma]: Jane Jacobs and similarly it seemed to me that what I really enjoyed about a dominant
[Amit Varma]: character is not so much the biography of this one incredibly interesting man which
[Amit Varma]: is you know fascinating in its own regard but also the larger themes that came up specifically
[Amit Varma]: and of course we'll talk about it in much more detail about the intersection between
[Amit Varma]: politics and science which is you know such a big theme in this so you know did you sort
[Amit Varma]: of have these themes in mind when you actually entered the project or did they take shape
[Amit Varma]: I see I didn't say fructify or did they take shape as you were sort of moving through the
[Guest]: material I think the main theme of the which is the theme of the interplay between science
[Guest]: and politics I think was something that is quite transparent to anyone who has even read
[Guest]: a little bit about Haldane so I think even when I started when I sent the pitch out for
[Guest]: this book that was definitely one of the themes that I wanted to explore there were other
[Guest]: things that I thought were interesting that came up much later one of them for example
[Guest]: was Haldane's view of what and what a utopian society was for him and that view itself changed
[Guest]: over time as he got older and grew to be disillusioned with certain things and entranced by new other
[Guest]: things and so those themes I guess like came up as I researched it but this question of
[Guest]: the twinning of science and politics was something that I was fascinated by when I first started
[Guest]: reading about Haldane and this was in I have to think back here it was in 2015 I think
[Guest]: January 2015 is when I started really reading to research this book in some detail I could
[Guest]: not have known at the time how intensely those themes would resonate five years later definitely
[Guest]: there were you know I already had at the back of my mind you know some notion of how science
[Guest]: and politics intersected in the realm of climate change you know my wife was for a long time
[Guest]: a climate change journalist and of course anybody who's reasonably well read these days
[Guest]: has read enough about how climate change science is itself shaped by political and economic
[Guest]: interests but I wanted to broaden that a little bit and kind of look at the history of that
[Guest]: and look at how Haldane himself dealt with it indeed even acknowledged it and then built
[Guest]: upon it but five years later here we are where a president is in power in the US who denies
[Guest]: so much of science to the extent that science you know marches for science started three
[Guest]: and a half years ago in America first and then spread to the rest of the world and you
[Guest]: know even as that built we come to 2020 when a pandemic is in play all over the world when
[Guest]: the science of vaccine research of disease of epidemiology of how data is interpreted
[Guest]: and presented has become an intensely political idea because to lose control of this narrative
[Guest]: would be to admit not only political failure but also to admit a certain lack of comprehension
[Guest]: of science you know I'm living here in the UK where for example the government took a
[Guest]: decision to go with one kind of you know model to control the epidemic before changing track
[Guest]: after a couple of weeks they wanted to pursue the Swedish model of trying to build herd
[Guest]: immunity before they realized that you know health services would get swamped and they
[Guest]: had to just lock the whole country down so these even more than you know three years
[Guest]: ago two years ago or even last year this is a moment in time when I think Paul Dane would
[Guest]: have spoken most eloquently to what the government isn't doing how literate and numerate policymakers
[Guest]: are and even how literate and numerate all of us are in terms of science because I think
[Guest]: Paul Dane's overarching principle was that everybody should have a scientific mindset
[Guest]: and ability to look at information and assess it based on evidence that is not just useful
[Guest]: to people who work in labs and in biotech companies but people who go about their daily
[Guest]: lives in a world that is dictated by science.
[Amit Varma]: So I was sort of fascinated also by the bits that you have on Paul Dane's childhood one
[Amit Varma]: of course because he was extremely prodigious like you write in his book quote the time
[Amit Varma]: Paul Dane legend has it he looked intently at the blood trickling out of a cut on his
[Amit Varma]: forehead and asked is it oxyhemoglobin or carboxyhemoglobin he was not yet four which
[Amit Varma]: is you know obviously a crazy kind of prodigy but also a creature of circumstance in the
[Amit Varma]: sense he was born to a certain kind of extreme privilege where his father was a great scientist
[Amit Varma]: and more than that what possibly made him different from his peers was that his father
[Amit Varma]: believed in actually going out into the field and practicing science like if he wanted to
[Amit Varma]: figure out why miners were diving he would go down into the mines himself and spend time
[Amit Varma]: and experiment on himself with the whole you know notion of taking a cannery to the coal
[Amit Varma]: mine came from him and the young JBS accompanied him on all these trips so he saw this sort
[Amit Varma]: of this other side of English society which similarly privileged kids would not have you
[Amit Varma]: know how much of for example when you look at say the British intellectuals of the 1910s
[Amit Varma]: or 20s or 30s would it be fair to say that they were pretty much all born to extreme
[Amit Varma]: privilege and that what kind of might have drawn Paul Dane apart was that he also had
[Amit Varma]: a sensitivity to the other side which came both from accompanying his father to all of
[Amit Varma]: these places and also the time he spent in the trenches in the first world war as you
[Guest]: point out yeah I think definitely among the you know the intellectuals in this field of
[Guest]: biology and physiology whom I read about while writing this book you had to have done the
[Guest]: whole public school which here is a book you know it's called public school elsewhere it's
[Guest]: private school so a public school education followed by a stint at Oxford or Cambridge
[Guest]: at the very least maybe two stints you know and Hardin did follow that model in some detail
[Guest]: he went to Eton as a King scholar he followed that up by going to Oxford for his undergraduate
[Guest]: degree so you know all of that seems to fit the CV of many other intellectuals in the
[Guest]: physiological sciences at the time but you're completely right in that what set him apart
[Guest]: and what set his childhood apart was this exposure to parts of British society that
[Guest]: none of the others would ever have had or very few would have had and I think you know
[Guest]: this taught him a few things one is that it taught him the defects of science has real
[Guest]: world effects and it has real world problems that can be addressed and as his father believed
[Guest]: it didn't just all have to be done within the confines of a lab on our pen and paper
[Guest]: this is ironic because Hardin himself would for the most part use pen and paper and very
[Guest]: little else in his own work but he was always aware of the link between what he was doing
[Guest]: and what the real world needed or required or had a deficit of so there was the fact
[Guest]: that he got to meet people like this all the time but the second thing that was quite egalitarian
[Guest]: about what his father did was that he used himself as a guinea pig this is something
[Guest]: that would have been quite unthinkable at a time when you could pay a poor person to
[Guest]: serve as a guinea pig for you you know there are distinctions in class in race all of these
[Guest]: things were so vast that you didn't have to use yourself it was a very egalitarian move
[Guest]: on the part of Hardin senior to subject himself to the kind of pressures quite literally I
[Guest]: mean air pressure temperatures you know humidity lack of oxygen all of these factors are going
[Guest]: to play for sailors and submarines or for miners very deep down in a coal mine he would
[Guest]: put himself through those same conditions and examine what the effects were like on
[Guest]: him Hardin senior's logic in this was how would you ever know the precise physiological
[Guest]: effects unless you underwent them yourself and maybe that was a scientific way of looking
[Guest]: at it and he didn't quite think about the egalitarian nest that was implicit in this
[Guest]: and I think that taught young JBS a lesson that he would remember all his life which
[Guest]: is basically that everyone is essentially physiologically created equal and that they
[Guest]: should therefore then be equal in the eyes of the law and of society and I want to read
[Amit Varma]: out a bit from an essay that Holden wrote much later but I want to bring it to bear
[Amit Varma]: on a question about his upbringing in fact where you know towards the end of his life
[Amit Varma]: he wrote an essay called what ails Indian science and in that he wrote quote I noticed
[Amit Varma]: that in India a new caste system is developing before the old one has disappeared the new
[Amit Varma]: system is based on academic degrees one cannot teach Bengali chemistry history or what you
[Amit Varma]: will without a degree in that subject and a higher degree given for research is almost
[Amit Varma]: obligatory if one hopes for a professional chair it is only a matter of time before I
[Amit Varma]: am debarred from teaching science or statistics since I have no degree of any kind in these
[Amit Varma]: subjects but in terms of the new caste system I'm qualified to teach the classics since
[Amit Varma]: I secured a somewhat marginal first class in literary human yours vulgarly called greats
[Amit Varma]: at Oxford stop good and and my question sort of here goes you know also to the term which
[Amit Varma]: you mentioned in the context of quizzing which is bricolage which is holding was born in
[Amit Varma]: the 19th century in November 1892 seems to be that classic maybe in that last generation
[Amit Varma]: of 19th century intellectuals who have studied a variety of different subjects they haven't
[Amit Varma]: specialized in one thing and you know which shows even in a scientific work I think one
[Amit Varma]: of your chapters is called synthesis where you know he's bringing this broader outlook
[Amit Varma]: this ability to step back and solving that debate between say the Mendelians and the
[Amit Varma]: Darwinists because he can take that step back because he has all that training in other
[Amit Varma]: things and he can quote Plato and Aristotle and Lucretius and all of those guys and how
[Amit Varma]: important do you think that is to break through thinking in any field and is it a loss for
[Amit Varma]: how knowledge develops that we don't seem to have much of that anymore yeah I mean it's
[Guest]: interesting I think Haldane would have been among the last generations in science who
[Guest]: could come to science without a degree in it I doubt and as a part of research for this
[Guest]: book I would I mean obviously I didn't have anybody to interview and quote but what I
[Guest]: would do is talk to other scientists just about his work but also about some of these
[Guest]: themes and one of the themes that came up quite often is this question of specialization
[Guest]: and how Haldane would have been among the last of the serious scientists who would have
[Guest]: not specialized in at the undergraduate level in part it is a nature of how science develops
[Guest]: is that it has gotten over the 20th century genetics let's take an example like genetics
[Guest]: and got so specialized that you had to start specializing quite early to be able to then
[Guest]: fine-tune your research to an even deeper point by the time you reach a postdoctorate
[Guest]: level you couldn't start off or very rarely could you start off studying English and then
[Guest]: switching broadly to biology in at your master's and then going further in that I mean it didn't
[Guest]: happen you had to you know this is also the structure of higher education itself today
[Guest]: is that by the time you finish your undergraduate degree you're expected to have completed two
[Guest]: internships and spent time in a lab in the university somewhere and you know it's a very
[Guest]: intense and intensely specialized feeling and a lot of that is inevitable a lot of it
[Guest]: has benefits because obviously if you start thinking about specific problems from the
[Guest]: time you're 21 by the time you're 30 you've actually sort of made great headway in that
[Guest]: particular problem but a number of scientists told me that there is a loss in it as well
[Guest]: as you said so this you know what Haldane said about the Indian caste system about the
[Guest]: specialization of knowledge has permeated every field everywhere by now and it particularly
[Guest]: includes the sciences and I think a number of scientists felt that loss felt the loss
[Guest]: of the generalist not the journalist the generalist coming to science and seeing bigger problems
[Guest]: and being able to knit various aspects together from a multidisciplinary point of view and
[Guest]: this catchphrase multidisciplinary I think is only now slowly starting to re-emerge in
[Guest]: academia somewhat in the sciences I think but in other fields as well I think the advantage
[Guest]: of what people like Haldane brought to this table is being starting to be recognized again
[Guest]: because precisely because scientists have not over the last half century say have stopped
[Guest]: thinking too deeply or too intensely about the political effects of their work if you
[Guest]: are in one silo you rarely see the effects of that silo on other silos or upon the general
[Guest]: world or upon the world outside and I think that is starting to be realized more and more
[Guest]: as everybody becomes a little bit more politically aware I think that is starting to be realized
[Guest]: more and more I hope I mean and again the last three years have seen a complete efflorescence
[Guest]: of political thinking on the part of scientists aided in no small part by the kind of political
[Guest]: regimes in power all over the world I think more and more we will start to see the benefits
[Amit Varma]: of that in scientific research itself and what was also sort of apparent in the biography
[Amit Varma]: and I want to you know discuss three different aspects of Haldane first as a scientist and
[Amit Varma]: as a writer slash public intellectual and then finally his politics but it struck me
[Amit Varma]: while reading about his scientific career that in a sense he went wherever his intellectual
[Amit Varma]: curiosity took him and it also strikes me and I don't know if you'd have a view on it
[Amit Varma]: that a modern day scientist so people training to be scientists are subject to different
[Amit Varma]: sets of incentives whereas you know this is your tenure track and this is your publication
[Amit Varma]: track and if you want to get funding these are the kind of projects which are you know
[Amit Varma]: quote-unquote sexy and all of these incentives will then shape their entire careers and their
[Amit Varma]: entire bodies of work is that broadly true is that something you've heard about from
[Amit Varma]: the scientific communities is that something that you know people kind of have thought
[Guest]: about and written about is it a problem absolutely I mean a number of scientists told me for
[Guest]: example the fact that many scientists for a long time chose to not have too much of
[Guest]: a political voice you know in part it's because this ivory tower phenomenon has built up more
[Guest]: and more over the 20th century academics feel that they're insulated to to an unreasonable
[Guest]: extent from the real world because they don't often experience its problems especially once
[Guest]: you have tenure so all of that is there but there's definitely people who told me that
[Guest]: having a political voice meant often speaking out against a government that is in power
[Guest]: when it is that government that decides what grants institutions decide what grants you
[Guest]: get and so therefore you try not to piss them off sometimes entire research programs are
[Guest]: funded by corporations that eventually want to monetize technologies or processes for
[Guest]: themselves speaking out against those corporations is not a wise thing to do if you're depending
[Guest]: on them for your research money and so a lot of these constricted scientists ability to
[Guest]: have a voice now this is also again a natural byproduct of just how science evolves if you
[Guest]: look at what the field of genetics was like when Haldane was born Mendel had not been
[Guest]: rediscovered there were big problems out there that you could access sort of from a generalist
[Guest]: point of view with very little equipment certainly and whatever equipment you needed wasn't sort
[Guest]: of very expensive in Haldane's case has always turned out to be it was pen and paper and
[Guest]: you could apply yourself to these things without having to depend on large grants and so on
[Guest]: and even Haldane despite all of that did feel the pinch of you know the lack of finances
[Guest]: at various points in his career now the situation is you know has progressed to the point where
[Guest]: you need a plethora of expensive equipment your big problems have been addressed for
[Guest]: the large part and you have to drill down into small problems and as a result of all
[Guest]: of this you know you don't want to jeopardize perhaps quite rightly and understandably you
[Guest]: don't want to jeopardize your ability to get these big grants to then work on these quite
[Guest]: specific problems I think it's an inevitable nature of the march of science you know that
[Guest]: from when the 20th century started and when the 21st century started science is unrecognizable
[Guest]: whereas you couldn't always say that of say the 16th and the 17th centuries or 17th and
[Guest]: 18th centuries you know I mean the paradigm shift has been immense and I think it's a
[Guest]: consequence of that scientists feel that a lot of their freedoms and a lot of what they
[Guest]: would otherwise want to say and do is dictated quite heavily by the nature of their work
[Amit Varma]: and the way their work is funded so you know let's talk about Haldane as a scientist now
[Amit Varma]: obviously his major contributions are in the field of genetics but he also dabbled widely
[Amit Varma]: elsewhere for example I was not aware it's something that I learned in your book that
[Amit Varma]: our notion of the primordial soup so to say comes from Haldane that he simultaneously
[Amit Varma]: and independently with the Russian scientists you know conceived of the origins of life
[Amit Varma]: lying in some kind of chemical soup where the Sun interacted and with chemicals and
[Amit Varma]: created amino acids and so on which I wasn't aware of but broadly he is remembered for
[Amit Varma]: his contributions in genetics so tell me a little bit about that and when I say broadly
[Amit Varma]: he has remembered as you point out that he's not even remembered that much because much
[Amit Varma]: of his work was so foundational and essential that we cannot just take it for granted which
[Guest]: is something he always thought was the best fate ever for a scientist by the way he thought
[Guest]: that the best compliment you could pay to a scientist work is to not even think about
[Guest]: how it's done that you just think that they are natural laws and axioms that we found
[Guest]: out there are then attributed to one person so I mean Haldane's biggest scientific contribution
[Guest]: was in a subfield of what we might call modern synthesis so to take us back to the early
[Guest]: 20th century what had happened was that Darwin had set out the theory of evolution by natural
[Guest]: selection and it had found a lot of traction but for some reason nobody could quite understand
[Guest]: how natural selection would work at this cellular level and when I say that the reason is that
[Guest]: Mendel who had published his papers also in the 19th century his work had been sort of
[Guest]: largely forgotten or not quite recognized for its significance in the way that it should
[Guest]: have been nobody had tied Mendel to Darwin nobody had seen that Mendel had set out these
[Guest]: units of hereditary information called genes and the big riddle left by Darwin's theory
[Guest]: which is how actually natural selection works at that level at the cellular level that could
[Guest]: have been answered by uniting Mendel and Darwin and that rediscovery happened in 1900 and
[Guest]: a few years thereafter about eight years after Haldane was born so that was a state the science
[Guest]: was in when Haldane went into university and broadly people who worked in this new field
[Guest]: of genetics and evolution split themselves into two camps one was the Darwinians and
[Guest]: one was the Mendelians and the Mendelians believed that these units called genes existed
[Guest]: and they produced big discrete changes in organisms because they were going by Mendel's
[Guest]: work so they believed that as Mendel had discovered there was a gene for determining whether a
[Guest]: pea had a smooth surface or whether it had a textured and wrinkly surface there were
[Guest]: two types of genes and whichever one was dominant would dictate what the pea's texture was like
[Guest]: the Mendelians assumed that this is how genes work big discrete changes the Darwinians believe
[Guest]: because Darwin had also postulated this that what was actually happening in a population
[Guest]: was that there were a number of very small variations that would eventually accumulate
[Guest]: over time to produce enough variation to then distinguish a species from another one so
[Guest]: the Darwinians would criticize Mendelians for saying look you can say that a pea is
[Guest]: textured or smooth but you can't explain a variation of heights in a population for example
[Guest]: because it's not just people are either tall or short there is every single height on the
[Guest]: spectrum is to be found and you have a smooth bell curve where there is an average kind
[Guest]: of height and the Darwinians believe that that was explained only by their own theory
[Guest]: of small variations in a population but they couldn't explain how these small variations
[Guest]: would have the kind of huge effects that would then create a new species altogether or to
[Guest]: create a completely different feature altogether and so this was a big inherent tussle that
[Guest]: nobody could quite explain and Haldane along with a couple of other scientists explained
[Guest]: this essentially united these or synthesized these two views of genetics and evolution
[Guest]: with what we call the modern synthesis which is intensely mathematically based but what
[Guest]: he and a couple of others did was to show through math that the small variations that
[Guest]: Haldane that Darwin postulated those small variations could with the power of natural
[Guest]: selection and he would build models out to explain how this would be possible could have
[Guest]: enough of a selective advantage to actually create new species or to create big changes
[Guest]: in a species so the power of natural selection and at a time when people thought natural
[Guest]: selection was almost dead because it couldn't explain speciation as powerfully as that at
[Guest]: time when it was almost dead Haldane and these two other scientists Ronald Fisher and Seymour
[Guest]: Wright they managed to explain through mathematics how this was possible they essentially brought
[Guest]: natural selection from the 19th century into the 20th century and pushed it forward towards
[Amit Varma]: the 21st.
[Amit Varma]: I also found it fascinating how big and you know how passionate he was about maths and
[Amit Varma]: how big that was a part of his arsenal like you've described on you know how he'd be on
[Amit Varma]: a bus and he'd always have a briefcase with him and it was very common for him just to
[Amit Varma]: take out paper from there and start doing algebra on the bus and you know he was kind
[Amit Varma]: of scribbling all the time and you also illustrated how using math alone he showed that natural
[Amit Varma]: selection was responsible for a certain kind of moth population instead of having mainly
[Amit Varma]: I think silverish wings going to you know black wings which I found you know so fascinating
[Amit Varma]: and so illustrative and so amazing that someone can just you know essentially get to that
[Amit Varma]: proof by just taking pen and paper and kind of getting it done.
[Amit Varma]: You want to talk a little bit about this because I just found it really fascinating and yeah
[Guest]: absolutely yeah one of his favorite phrases was an ounce of algebra is worth a ton of
[Guest]: verbal argument which is I think like a fascinating way to describe it.
[Guest]: So Haldane was you know consummately the pen and paper guy to the extent that he would
[Guest]: not even go out and collect his own field data you know field data was often collected
[Guest]: by other people and he would just sort of get those data sets and he would look at it.
[Guest]: So one of the things that he worked on was the data set of moth populations in and around
[Guest]: Manchester in the 19th century and what had happened, what lepidopterists had observed
[Guest]: was that there used to be you know a moth with silver gray wings called Biston betularia.
[Guest]: A surprisingly short period of time these silvery moths disappeared to be replaced by
[Guest]: moths with almost entirely black wings and it happened so fast that people couldn't quite
[Guest]: figure out how this was possible.
[Guest]: For a long time one of the theories was that the soot from the factories of the Industrial
[Guest]: Revolution was darkening the wings of the moths.
[Guest]: It was actually as a layer, it was a black soot layer on top of the wings.
[Guest]: There was another theory that said that there were a lot of chemicals in the air that caused
[Guest]: these moths to mutate very fast so a silvery moth itself became a black moth in its own
[Guest]: lifetime.
[Guest]: You know these were the kind of theories that were floating around at the time and then
[Guest]: eventually of course people did realize that the moths that had black wings were getting
[Guest]: some kind of selective advantage because the trees in that area where these moths used
[Guest]: to perch, their bark was gradually getting blackened by soot, the trees and the branches
[Guest]: of the tree.
[Guest]: And so these moths, these black winged moths would sit on these trees and they would be
[Guest]: camouflaged because they couldn't be seen by the birds that hunted them, they were black
[Amit Varma]: on black.
[Guest]: Earlier it was silvery bark so earlier it helped them anodize.
[Guest]: And as the black darkened or blackened the silvery moths would stand out, they would
[Guest]: be easy prey for birds whereas the black moths wouldn't and so they would survive.
[Guest]: But even then you know it wasn't sort of an established, nobody had confirmed this and
[Guest]: the only way to confirm this was to prove in that short span of time natural selection
[Guest]: could work on giving the silver moths a disadvantage and the black moths an advantage to the extent
[Guest]: that they could almost completely replace the silver moth population.
[Guest]: And this is what Haldane did, he took this data that was published over the years and
[Guest]: he set up an equation by which he could figure out what coefficient of selective advantage
[Guest]: was for black winged moths.
[Guest]: And he proved that, you know, with these data sets he proved that this kind of selective
[Guest]: advantage was indeed possible, natural selection could act in a short span of time so as to
[Guest]: completely replace one population with another.
[Guest]: And it was the first time anyone had done that kind of rigorous analysis of data on
[Guest]: this moth population or indeed on any other biological population.
[Guest]: And it was the first of a series of 10 papers that he would publish over the next 10 years
[Guest]: in which he constantly refined and tweaked this model of selective advantage in various
[Guest]: kind of settings.
[Guest]: You know, he would examine what would happen if a population migrated elsewhere, what would
[Guest]: happen if a plague struck a population, you know, all these kind of various permutations
[Guest]: and combinations of situations.
[Guest]: And he would figure out selective advantages in each of those and through an accretion
[Guest]: of all of this he built up I think body of evidence to conclusively demonstrate the power
[Guest]: of natural selection.
[Guest]: And the fact that Darwin was right that Darwinism was not dead after all.
[Amit Varma]: It's also such a great example of the seen in the unseen that you have chemical effluents
[Amit Varma]: from a factory making the bark of trees dark and then within two or three human generations
[Amit Varma]: all the moths change from silver wings to black wings.
[Amit Varma]: It's fascinating and also so beautiful the way the whole sort of process works.
[Amit Varma]: You know, Douglas Adams once said that he stopped believing in God when he understood
[Amit Varma]: natural selection because the beauty and the awe that he felt when he really understood
[Amit Varma]: it was, you know, God could not compare with that.
[Amit Varma]: That's kind of, you know, all his scientific work is enormously kind of amusing, but then
[Amit Varma]: we also, amazing rather, but then we also sort of come to where, you know, they shade
[Amit Varma]: over into his political beliefs, how his political beliefs are almost shaped by his scientific
[Amit Varma]: beliefs.
[Amit Varma]: Can you talk a little bit about that and would you say it was kind of inevitable that attraction
[Amit Varma]: to Marxism would happen given the dual propensity of him being that sort of man of science as
[Amit Varma]: it were obsessed with how systems work and therefore, as Marx was being therefore drawn
[Amit Varma]: to Darwin's theory for that reason, and also the sympathy that he would have felt for the
[Amit Varma]: underclasses given that, you know, he had far more interactions with people from other
[Amit Varma]: classes and others like him did.
[Guest]: I think it's interesting how the art of biography works, which I've realized through this.
[Guest]: I mean, in the sense that you look at another person looking at Haldane's life story might
[Guest]: pick up completely different reasons for why he eventually became a socialist and then
[Guest]: a communist.
[Guest]: And I think it depends.
[Guest]: This is where the subjectivity of the biographer comes in, which is, I, in my own life, I tend
[Guest]: to place a lot of emphasis on what my childhood was like in order to explain who I am today.
[Guest]: And it's just something that I have done, you know, everybody constructs their own origin
[Guest]: stories for themselves, and this is possibly mine.
[Guest]: And so therefore, when I came to Haldane's life, I sort of yielded to my proclivity and
[Guest]: I just sort of also explained a lot of it, although not all of it, a lot of what he became
[Guest]: later to his childhood.
[Guest]: And so I explained it to the model that his father set up, which is the model of a scientist
[Guest]: who believed that science had to be done for the benefit of the masses, a man who believed
[Guest]: in a certain kind of equality in society.
[Guest]: And so all that exposure that Haldane had at some point, in my view, helped a lot towards
[Guest]: making him a socialist.
[Guest]: Definitely, he was never a conservative of any kind, even though his uncle was a conservative
[Guest]: politician.
[Guest]: His own family and his father and himself never went into that side of the political
[Guest]: spectrum at all.
[Guest]: But then as he grew up, and as he continued to work in science, even though his own science
[Guest]: was not in any way directly related to, you know, the practical matters of society in
[Guest]: many aspects, you know, he always had in his mind, this link between science and society,
[Guest]: the fact that science had to work for the upliftment of society more than anything else.
[Guest]: That was the noblest thing science could do.
[Guest]: And so when the Russian Revolution happened in a couple of decades thereafter, as the
[Guest]: Soviet Union paid, at first, real attention to science, and then after that, lip service,
[Guest]: obviously, and not anything else.
[Guest]: But as they continued to champion this model of a scientifically built egalitarian society,
[Guest]: it was inevitable that he would, you know, fall for the attraction of that.
[Guest]: He went to the Soviet Union once with his wife in 1928.
[Guest]: And while his wife came away with decidedly mixed views about how well the Soviet Union
[Guest]: was succeeding, he came away completely captivated.
[Guest]: He genuinely saw, you know, or thought he saw an enormous amount of funding and attention
[Guest]: being paid by the government to science and scientists and scientific institutions.
[Guest]: It was something that was always sort of a quibble for him in England itself.
[Guest]: He thought capitalist societies were inevitably organized around what corporations want and
[Guest]: not what the people want.
[Guest]: And so therefore, governments would do what interests wanted them to do.
[Guest]: This was a view that his father also held.
[Guest]: And he, you know, again, multiple times through the course of his early career, he had seen
[Guest]: that politicians in England frequently disregarded the advice of scientists, much to the, and
[Guest]: they never bore the brunt of that ignorance.
[Guest]: In fact, the people who bore the brunt of that ignorance were the regular people.
[Guest]: So for example, if his father designed a particular kind of gas mask to protect against chlorine
[Guest]: gas attacks in the First World War, the government and its civil servants would substitute one
[Guest]: ingredient for another, make the mask less effective than it should have been.
[Guest]: And, you know, the people who bore the brunt of that were the soldiers in the trenches,
[Guest]: working class men quite often, who would be saddled with these non-functional masks and
[Guest]: would die as a result.
[Guest]: And he saw this time and time again.
[Guest]: I mean, he would see politicians be rewarded for scientific advances that had been made
[Guest]: by scientists.
[Guest]: And I think all of this disillusioned him quite a bit about the way that Western capitalist
[Guest]: societies were set up at the time and drove him more and more to the left of the political
[Amit Varma]: spectrum.
[Amit Varma]: I was always found it curious that, you know, Marxists saw Darwinism as a validation of
[Amit Varma]: or a natural sort of extension of what they believed in, because, you know, I did an episode
[Amit Varma]: with Matt Ridley a couple of years back called the evolution of everything, you know, based
[Amit Varma]: on a book he had written, where he pointed out that common force between a natural selection
[Amit Varma]: itself and the way languages develop and the way markets work is basically that it is a
[Amit Varma]: kind of emergent order, that there isn't a grand planner, there isn't a grand designer,
[Amit Varma]: you know, I mean, the whole intelligent design argument, which came from William Paley was
[Amit Varma]: that, look, this is so complex and beautiful, someone must have designed it.
[Amit Varma]: And the genius of Darwin and those who followed him like Haldane was to point out that no,
[Amit Varma]: you don't need a designer, this stuff happens on its own, which is so counterintuitive.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, and that would lead you not to therefore, believe in things like central
[Amit Varma]: planning or that you can design a society.
[Amit Varma]: And I think, you know, when I read about Haldane, I thought he kind of fit the description of
[Amit Varma]: what Adam Smith would have called the man of system.
[Amit Varma]: I'll just sort of read out what Smith's, how Smith defined that, where writing in the theory
[Amit Varma]: of moral sentiments, Smith wrote, quote, the man of system is apt to be very wise in his
[Amit Varma]: own conceit, and is often so enamored with the supposed beauty of his ideal plan of government
[Amit Varma]: that he cannot suffer the smallest deviation from any part of it.
[Amit Varma]: He goes on to establish it completely and in all its parts without any regard either
[Amit Varma]: to the great interests or to the strong prejudices which may oppose it.
[Amit Varma]: He seems to imagine that he can arrange the different members of a great society with
[Amit Varma]: as much ease as a hand arranges the different pieces upon a chessboard.
[Amit Varma]: He does not consider that the pieces upon the chessboard have no other principle of
[Amit Varma]: motion besides that which the hand impresses upon them, but that in the great chessboard
[Amit Varma]: of human society, every single piece has a principle of motion of its own, altogether
[Amit Varma]: different from that which the legislature might choose to impress upon it, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And it strikes me that one in this sense that Haldane and so many others in that era, you
[Amit Varma]: know, we've also spoken about how eugenics held so much sway over both the left and the
[Amit Varma]: right and was almost common wisdom in a sense.
[Amit Varma]: And how so much of that seems to come from the belief that, you know, when scientists
[Amit Varma]: realize the power of their tools and there is no denying that they're incredibly powerful,
[Amit Varma]: you know, the things that Haldane could prove with algebra and sort of the advances in knowledge
[Amit Varma]: he could make, it's easy to get carried away with that sense of power and then be arrogant
[Amit Varma]: enough to assume that it applies to society.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, you know, a classic illustration of that which you've given in that excellent
[Amit Varma]: first chapter in your book was, of course, the Soviet scientist Lysenko, you know, got
[Amit Varma]: carried away by this.
[Amit Varma]: And Lysenko, of course, was a shitty scientist, Haldane was a great scientist.
[Amit Varma]: But what it seems to me is that he is applying a certain kind of rigor to his science, but
[Amit Varma]: not a similar rigor to his politics, which we again see later in his defense of Lysenko,
[Amit Varma]: for example.
[Amit Varma]: What is sort of your sense of all this?
[Amit Varma]: And is that a danger that, say, men of system, scientists or people who are, you know, very
[Amit Varma]: accomplished that, you know, it could be science, it could be managerial work, like there is
[Amit Varma]: this notion that if you're the CEO of a company, you can run a country as well, which is another
[Amit Varma]: mistaken notion people seem to have, as if there is any remote comparison between the
[Amit Varma]: complexities involved.
[Amit Varma]: Do you think that this was sort of Haldane's kind of fatal mistake?
[Amit Varma]: And not just his, but I think a lot of Marxists embraced Darwinism, right?
[Guest]: Because as you point out in your book.
[Guest]: Yeah, okay.
[Guest]: Well, there's so many layers to this.
[Guest]: So let me like, let me unpack some of them.
[Guest]: I mean, a couple of things that I thought about while you were talking about this mystery
[Guest]: as to why Marxists and Darwinists at the time seem to find common cause.
[Guest]: One is, I think that in the 19th century, these were both challenges to the established
[Guest]: order.
[Guest]: I think Marxism was obviously a challenge to the way that markets were structured.
[Guest]: And Darwinism was a challenge to the church.
[Guest]: It was sort of a refutation of any principle of God or the Godhead in any way.
[Guest]: And I think as many, as to happen quite often, differences were papered over just because
[Guest]: these two were allied at the time, sort of quite radical causes.
[Guest]: The second also was, I think both, I mean, Marxists and Darwinists, both, I think might
[Guest]: have been seen to believe in what might be called the theory of bottom-up change.
[Guest]: That basically that you, that organizing happens from the bottom, you know, animals change,
[Guest]: well, species evolve because first there was one unit or one individual mutant or variant
[Guest]: that emerged that then proved to be more, you know, so there are these broader principles
[Guest]: that operate, but the change happens at the bottom.
[Guest]: And I think the idea of Marxism as a kind of revolution that begins from the bottom
[Guest]: through the agglomeration of people and how to change their material well-being in order
[Guest]: to then change society, I think, again, there's a similarity over there.
[Guest]: But the interesting thing, and maybe the point where maybe we can choose to part ways here
[Guest]: is that I think everybody who approaches politics underplays the emotional reasons or the irrational
[Guest]: reasons for which they are drawn to a particular political ideology and overplays the rational
[Guest]: reasons that they are drawn to it.
[Guest]: Certainly Haldane and other Marxists of his time, examples, you know, Haldane, as I point
[Guest]: out in my book, I mean, a lot of the reason that he was driven to the left was because
[Guest]: of the circumstances in which he grew up, the kind of things that he saw that left an
[Guest]: impression on him and that directed both his work and his political ideology.
[Guest]: But equally, I think, are people who tend to believe that economics is an exact science
[Guest]: and that they have figured out that there is an exactitude, there's a precise way in
[Guest]: which a market can work for the best benefit of society and approach it from there and
[Guest]: insist that they are being rational when they're doing it, that there is no tug of emotion
[Guest]: or sentiment or irrationality or even sometimes blind belief in the way in which this works.
[Guest]: I think you could say it for people on every part of the political spectrum and not just
[Guest]: for Marxists alone.
[Guest]: Of course, there is a completely valid argument to be made about how Haldane and other Marxists
[Guest]: and communists should not have been blind to the perversions of science that were happening
[Guest]: in the Soviet Union at the time.
[Guest]: In fact, this is a point I make in the opening chapter and certainly Haldane's insistence
[Guest]: on defending Stalin even into the 1950s when the extent of his show trials and his purges
[Guest]: were starting to become quite well known, I mean that was completely mystifying and
[Guest]: I can only ascribe that to Haldane's stubbornness which is demonstrated in many other forms.
[Guest]: So you're completely right, he didn't bring to his politics the nimbleness and flexibility
[Guest]: and willingness to change his mind that marked his scientific work.
[Guest]: But I think that is the nature of most people who approach politics in any part of the political
[Amit Varma]: spectrum.
[Amit Varma]: A bunch of things to unpack here, one that's a great insight that you shared that we often
[Amit Varma]: underplay the emotional reasons and overplay the rational reasons and I would completely
[Amit Varma]: agree with Haldane and I think that there was, that society was broken, that government
[Amit Varma]: was in the sway of private interests which kind of remains the case today so one can
[Amit Varma]: sort of understand that attraction.
[Amit Varma]: That said, I think, and he could not have known that at this time, but while in terms
[Amit Varma]: of science, his rigor was spot on and he was obviously one of the great geniuses of the
[Amit Varma]: time.
[Amit Varma]: He didn't understand the principles of economics, for example, like you've referred to, I'll
[Amit Varma]: quote from your book, in 1932 he released a science fiction story, The Goldmakers, an
[Amit Varma]: approximation of a Wellsian yarn in which a new technique to distill gold out of seawater
[Amit Varma]: threatens to disrupt the world's mining concerns.
[Amit Varma]: The inventor plans to use his profits to start endowing science as it should be endowed,
[Amit Varma]: a pet cause for Haldane, although in the tale he doesn't recognize how these profits will
[Amit Varma]: plummet if the markets are suddenly flooded with fresh gold, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: But leaving that aside, the other thing that I'd kind of taken issue with is that yeah,
[Amit Varma]: in Marxism, in theory, they might talk of it being bottom up, but in practice, it can
[Amit Varma]: only be achieved through top-down coercion.
[Amit Varma]: And that is something that, you know, Haldane also seemed to have turned a blind eye to,
[Amit Varma]: you know, the moral question of do the means justify the end, for example, in 1928, when
[Amit Varma]: he met one of the scientists who hosted him and showed him great hospitality was Nikolai
[Amit Varma]: Vavilov, I think his name was.
[Amit Varma]: And then later Vavilov was arrested because, you know, Lysenko didn't like him.
[Amit Varma]: And he was murdered in 1942, essentially, he was imprisoned and then he died in prison.
[Amit Varma]: And that is something that, you know, Haldane completely shaded over when he was asked to
[Amit Varma]: comment on, for example, you know, the many political prisoners and many scientists, you
[Amit Varma]: point out in the book about how at one point in an essay or a piece that he's writing,
[Amit Varma]: he mentions that a couple of scientists were no longer in their positions.
[Amit Varma]: But then later on, he sort of says, oh, they didn't do any important work anyway.
[Amit Varma]: And you see these sort of this kind of finessing happening, where, you know, again, it seems
[Amit Varma]: to me to be, in that sense, a wonderful study of how his character also is corroded by this
[Amit Varma]: political affiliation and this ideology to the extent that where there is a clear choice
[Amit Varma]: to be made between his science and his politics, that is when Lysenko basically says there
[Amit Varma]: is no such thing as a gene and, you know, goes into that Lamarckianism that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: that qualities we acquire during a lifetime can be inherited.
[Amit Varma]: And at that point, when it is completely clear that the science is on one side, and these
[Amit Varma]: guys are on the other side, he sticks with these guys, because he's a card carrying member
[Amit Varma]: of the Communist Party, and he feels that for the larger cause, he must.
[Amit Varma]: And this was incredibly fascinating to me.
[Amit Varma]: And you've pointed out in an interview somewhere that you sort of see this as the exception,
[Amit Varma]: the one weak moment, the defense of Lysenko, but to my eyes, and just judging from I haven't
[Amit Varma]: read anything else on him except your remarkable book, and there are enough details on that.
[Amit Varma]: And my sense from that was that this was sort of a pattern, like even in 1928, when he went,
[Amit Varma]: the squalor was there, it's just that he fell for the confirmation bias and chose to completely
[Amit Varma]: ignore it while his wife, you know, noticed some of it.
[Amit Varma]: And it seems to me, and it's almost a very tragic human story in that sense, where he
[Amit Varma]: is letting his politics, and this brings me to sort of, or I'll ask you to, I'll get to
[Amit Varma]: my question later, I'll ask you to, you know, comment on this.
[Guest]: Yeah, you know, his one fatal mistake, I think was, as you quite rightly point out, was the
[Guest]: defense of Lysenko, and by extension, the defense of the Soviet Union at a time when
[Guest]: many of its policies could not bear defending, and the fact that he did this in itself sort
[Guest]: of instructive.
[Guest]: But let me point out a couple of things.
[Guest]: First is that as a scientist, to be a scientist in the 1910s and the 1920s, and to look to
[Guest]: a regime which promised to bring the benefits of science to the masses, to promise a whole
[Guest]: new political system, I mean, we have to look at this from the point of view, not of people
[Guest]: who are living in the 21st century, and you've seen what happened in the 1980s and 90s, with
[Guest]: the collapse of communism, but as people living in the 1910s and 20s, who are seeing a whole
[Guest]: new alternative system of government and society spring up somewhere in one of the great nations
[Guest]: of the world, and the promise that science will be used to equalize people, and all investment
[Guest]: in science will be used to improve livelihoods, to improve agricultural practices, for example,
[Guest]: I mean, this must have been an immense lure, to the extent that it fooled somebody like
[Guest]: Haldane who went there in 1928.
[Guest]: And even in 1928, you know, as we know from the chronology of events, the show trials
[Guest]: had only just about begun, they were, you know, often inaccessible to people who didn't
[Guest]: probably speak Russian.
[Guest]: So to see squalor around you is one thing, and you'd think that maybe it is only the
[Guest]: effect of the new Soviet regime not having been in power long enough, and that eventually
[Guest]: the squalor will disappear.
[Guest]: But to gauge perversions of power that was starting to happen at that time already was
[Guest]: another thing altogether that I think would have been invisible to Haldane quite naturally
[Guest]: as somebody who didn't speak Russian, whose entire visit was possibly curated by Vavilov
[Guest]: and other people from the Soviet state.
[Guest]: I won't accuse him of blindness at that point, so much as just an inability to access a lot
[Guest]: of what was happening around him.
[Guest]: As things progressed, I think in the 1930s, this is very much a human factor, as you rightly
[Guest]: point out, a human frailty, which is that as you wed yourself more and more to a political
[Guest]: cause, you dig yourself in more and more.
[Guest]: You are unwilling to make radical changes in your political judgment.
[Guest]: And this is something we see all the time today.
[Guest]: And so it's particularly instructive to read of Haldane's experience with this.
[Guest]: My big curiosity about the Lysenko affair was whether he genuinely believed either that
[Guest]: what Lysenko was doing, was saying was accurate.
[Guest]: It couldn't have been, because then that meant he was negating his own decades worth of work.
[Guest]: So then did he believe that this was all sort of permissible, that a few lives lost and
[Guest]: a few scientists imprisoned was permissible for the larger cause?
[Guest]: And the third thing I wonder is, did he ever stand up within the Communist Party itself
[Guest]: for some of the principles that he believed in?
[Guest]: It was the third thing that intrigued me the most, because nobody had written about this.
[Guest]: Either nobody had analyzed his papers and his documents deeply enough or hadn't read
[Guest]: them.
[Guest]: It felt to me to kind of look through his correspondences with other members of the
[Guest]: British Communist Party at the time, the memoranda he circulated within the party.
[Guest]: And the thing I found that is he criticized the Soviet Union and Lysenko and Soviet science
[Guest]: extensively within the party itself.
[Guest]: So what he clearly thought was that he was best serving the cause of both science and
[Guest]: society if he restricted his criticisms to that close group.
[Guest]: If he tried to effect the change from within, rather than seeming to abandon the party in
[Guest]: the public eye.
[Guest]: And I think this is a choice that many of us very often are called upon to make even
[Guest]: today.
[Guest]: You know, we all have entrenched political beliefs in one way or another.
[Guest]: We are all painfully aware, at least those of us who think about this seriously, we are
[Guest]: all painfully aware that these political positions are limiting in and of themselves.
[Guest]: Very often they are tied to the fortunes of one party and every party is fickle and flawed
[Guest]: and we have to stand up for that party or that cause even while ignoring its hypocrisies
[Guest]: or its flaws.
[Guest]: It is particularly true in a two-party system like the US.
[Guest]: It is even true in a multi-party system like India.
[Guest]: And my point and the reason I wanted to explain this Haldane episode in depth, this Lysenko
[Guest]: episode in depth, was to illustrate that this happened even to people who purported to approach
[Amit Varma]: all of this with a scientific point.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, no, I found it very interesting and relatable.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, and it's another theme that you sort of pick upon is you talk about how
[Amit Varma]: like, you know, Haldane, of course, was a prolific public intellectual, wrote a lot
[Amit Varma]: which we'll talk about.
[Amit Varma]: But one of the themes that you pick upon is how there was that sort of space where scientists
[Amit Varma]: were speaking out in politics.
[Amit Varma]: You refer to the book, The Visible College, and you've spoken about the, you know, the
[Amit Varma]: five guys at Cambridge who were, you know, prominent scientists and people who were speaking
[Amit Varma]: out politically.
[Amit Varma]: At the same time, one of them, Banal, wrote a book called The Social Function of Science.
[Amit Varma]: And then you lament that it went off over the decades as scientists got into an ivory
[Amit Varma]: tower and so on.
[Amit Varma]: And then in the end, in a hopeful note, you said that, okay, they are now gradually coming
[Amit Varma]: back.
[Amit Varma]: And I had sort of two opposite reactions to this.
[Amit Varma]: One reaction was that we need more of the scientific viewpoint in politics, because
[Amit Varma]: otherwise politics, you know, they build their own narratives, which need to be countered
[Amit Varma]: with good science.
[Amit Varma]: So there, I completely agree with you.
[Amit Varma]: But the point that I'm conflicted about is that while I would like to see more science
[Amit Varma]: in politics, I'm not sure I would like to see more politics in science.
[Amit Varma]: Because what happens today, and this is something that is, you know, I think a crisis on both
[Amit Varma]: the right and the left, is that politics impinges upon science in a way that in some particular
[Amit Varma]: context, there is a chilling effect upon scientists, for example, there was a recent debate on,
[Amit Varma]: you know, involving JK Rowling about whether biological sex is real or not.
[Amit Varma]: My point is not to take a stance on that, but my point is to say that this is something
[Amit Varma]: that scientists should be able to debate and discuss.
[Amit Varma]: But it seems to me that today, it's just one of those subjects which has been put out of
[Amit Varma]: bounds.
[Amit Varma]: You cannot debate and discuss it anymore.
[Amit Varma]: And if you take a particular position on it, you could lose your job or you could, you
[Amit Varma]: know, not get hired by the university you were applying to.
[Amit Varma]: And this is just one example.
[Amit Varma]: And again, I'm not taking a position on this one way or the other.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, there's even been a similar chilling effect, for example, when you talk
[Amit Varma]: about something like inheritable differences.
[Amit Varma]: And there again, you see sort of perhaps an overreaction to an earlier politics, where
[Amit Varma]: a particular kind of science, the science of inherited differences was used to justify
[Amit Varma]: horribly coercive state action in eugenics, which we've seen, which is one of the big
[Amit Varma]: lessons we've learned.
[Amit Varma]: But regardless of that, you know, when it is prescriptive and is used in a particular
[Amit Varma]: kind of politics, yes, it's a problem.
[Amit Varma]: But when it's descriptive, and you just have scientists exploring different subjects, why
[Amit Varma]: should you stop studying it?
[Amit Varma]: So my point here is, again, not to take a stand on any of these issues, but say, but
[Amit Varma]: just point out that the scientific temperament, as I think even Haldane would have agreed,
[Amit Varma]: is that you study all sides, and you let that openness remain where anybody is free to study
[Amit Varma]: anything.
[Amit Varma]: And yet today, we have politics impinging upon science, where some areas of potential
[Amit Varma]: study are just out of bounds because of political reasons.
[Amit Varma]: What's your reaction?
[Guest]: I mean, what Haldane's argument and what his experience was, is that politics has never
[Guest]: ever stopped being a part of science, and it is sort of a fool's errand to believe otherwise.
[Guest]: And it's exemplified so beautifully during the course of Haldane's own life, which is
[Guest]: that as soon as genetics became a thing, as soon as a very first decade of the 20th century,
[Guest]: as soon as people thought about evolution and the fact that there were genes and there
[Guest]: is such a thing as fitness, immediately they started to apply it to races, to the extent
[Guest]: that the British government, which had suffered terribly in the Boer War in the late 1800s
[Guest]: and 1900s, they started to think about the fitness of their population.
[Guest]: I write extensively in this book about this campaign of sterilization in the US to weed
[Guest]: the fit people out of society, of sort of sequestering people here in the UK to make
[Guest]: sure they don't breed and produce further quote-unquote unfit people.
[Guest]: So this has been a part of science since time immemorial.
[Guest]: The things that we talked about here that you mentioned, which are enormously interesting,
[Guest]: which is somebody like JK Rowling sort of talking about biological sex, for example,
[Guest]: Haldane wouldn't quite characterize that as, I guess, a scientist's ability or inability
[Guest]: to work on the intricacies of biological sex.
[Guest]: I don't actually know, I haven't looked into this in any detail, whether funding has been
[Guest]: granted, not granted, publication status has been granted, not granted, to papers based
[Guest]: on political views, but certainly the pressures are immense and the pressures have always
[Guest]: been there.
[Guest]: One of the things, you know, we talked earlier about how the Lysenko episode was this regrettable
[Guest]: one-off in Haldane's career and what I meant to add on to that is also relevant here, which
[Guest]: is that Haldane's scientific approach to things in so many other cases led him into exactly
[Guest]: the right direction.
[Guest]: You know, Haldane grew up as a child of the 19th century, early 20th century, and he was
[Guest]: saddled initially with a lot of the racist biases that belong to Englishmen of his generation.
[Guest]: He grew to outgrew that because he did more and more science, understood more and more
[Guest]: about how human populations and genes work.
[Guest]: It led him to take an extremely vociferous stance against fascist notions of what science
[Guest]: and racial purity were, to the extent that he put himself in harm's way when he went
[Guest]: to Spain during the Civil War to help in whatever way he could on the front to fight the fascists.
[Guest]: I mean, he was that committed to an anti-fascist stance.
[Guest]: So you know, in many of these cases, scientists speaking up and having the weight of scientific
[Guest]: experience behind them, I think has inevitably enriched public debate and it has definitely
[Guest]: very often stood up against distortions of science that are propagated by politicians
[Guest]: or people on the left or people on the right.
[Guest]: I think the Lysenko episode is remarkable precisely because it was the only time where
[Guest]: he allowed his political beliefs to override his scientific beliefs.
[Guest]: If he had acted in character in that episode, as in every other episode, he would have stood
[Guest]: up against the Soviet Union, perhaps quit the party, and said that this was a clear
[Guest]: violation of scientific knowledge and rigor.
[Amit Varma]: He didn't do that.
[Amit Varma]: He did praise Stalin after he died as well.
[Amit Varma]: So it's, you know, so I have a question for you.
[Amit Varma]: But before that, sort of, I want to move on to Haldane's writing now.
[Amit Varma]: And you had cited this excellent article he wrote, which was almost meta because he was
[Amit Varma]: extremely prolific in terms of writing and even giving talks.
[Amit Varma]: You mentioned there was a year where he gave 100 talks.
[Amit Varma]: And he then got meta and wrote this piece called how to write a popular scientific article.
[Amit Varma]: And you're right, his first piece of stern advice, know a great deal more about your
[Amit Varma]: subject than you put on paper, then look for a familiar analogy or pull it out of the facts
[Amit Varma]: of everyday experience.
[Amit Varma]: And now you quote Haldane, compare the production of hot gas in the bomb to that of steam in
[Amit Varma]: a kettle, the changes which occur in the bird each year to those which take place in men
[Amit Varma]: once in a lifetime at puberty, the precipitation of casein by calcium salts to the formation
[Amit Varma]: of soap suds.
[Amit Varma]: If you know enough, you will be able to proceed to your goal in a series of hops, rather than
[Amit Varma]: a single long jump, stop good.
[Amit Varma]: And you also sort of talk about his philosophy towards his craft, which, you know, I think
[Amit Varma]: Hemingway who he hung out with during the Spanish Civil War, I mean, he seems to have
[Amit Varma]: been like Forrest Gump.
[Amit Varma]: He was everywhere.
[Guest]: Yeah, exactly.
[Guest]: He was very much a kind of Kilroy was your type of guy.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, the picture that one gets of him as a writer about sciences of a person
[Amit Varma]: of remarkable craft and knowledge and bringing it to bear.
[Amit Varma]: In another part of the book, you write about sort of political writing about communism,
[Amit Varma]: which is, again, though you didn't use those words, I'm kind of just thinking aloud, but
[Amit Varma]: were more woolly would have tended to be more abstract than concrete, unlike in these, you
[Amit Varma]: know, amazing scientific examples that we used.
[Amit Varma]: So while you were going through the archives, is that a difference that you noticed?
[Amit Varma]: Did it feel like you know, the Haldane who was writing about science and about things
[Amit Varma]: of which he had deep knowledge was, you know, was the writing different?
[Guest]: I think the purpose was different.
[Guest]: I think when he was writing about science for the lay public, I think his effort was
[Guest]: to get to explain and to get people to understand, but more importantly, to get people to understand
[Guest]: how scientists think, you know, the kind of series of logical steps in the weighing of
[Guest]: evidence that scientists often do.
[Guest]: I think when he spoke about when he wrote about politics or spoke about politics, his
[Guest]: purpose was to convince, to persuade, to bring people to his point of view.
[Guest]: And I think necessarily for that reason, he often allowed himself to slip into what might
[Guest]: sometimes be called propaganda.
[Guest]: Not always and not with every political article, for example, a lot of the political pieces
[Guest]: he wrote about Nazi science, about racial science.
[Guest]: He was very clear about and he was quite over there.
[Guest]: He was sharp and clear and unambiguous and scientific even.
[Guest]: But I think every time he tried to refer to the Soviet Union and to communism as an ideology
[Guest]: to be admired, he let himself slip into propagandistic mode, which was, I mean, and the distinction
[Guest]: is quite clear.
[Guest]: You read a lot of his essays and the essay for essays, for the most part, will stick
[Guest]: with science and they'll be clear and precise and little gems of explication.
[Guest]: And then towards the end, he'll want to draw a political moral out of it just to buttress
[Guest]: his own political philosophy.
[Guest]: And at that particular instance, he will slip into a kind of nebulousness in his language
[Guest]: that he would otherwise have deployed.
[Amit Varma]: While you finish the book, and we're kind of getting to the later stage of his life.
[Amit Varma]: And while you finish the book, did you sort of get a sense of the evolution of his character,
[Amit Varma]: like quite apart from the things that he's doing in, say, the scientific domain or the
[Amit Varma]: political domain?
[Amit Varma]: You know, you've spoken about how is the transition between his marriages and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: But do you get a sense of him as a person, for example, one thing you pointed out is
[Amit Varma]: that many people would wonder about why he chose to come to India of all places in 1957.
[Amit Varma]: And one reason that you point out, which you discovered when you went through his bank
[Amit Varma]: statements and, you know, all of those papers, which are, you know, otherwise inaccessible,
[Amit Varma]: is that he was actually very short of money.
[Amit Varma]: You describe how, you know, partly because he had alimony payments going out to his first
[Amit Varma]: wife and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And you describe at one point about how an American journalist wrote to him with a bunch
[Amit Varma]: of questions.
[Amit Varma]: And he said that, listen, it would take me hours to answer these personal questions.
[Amit Varma]: Are you willing to, you know, kind of pay for it, which reminded me of an experience I had
[Amit Varma]: in Cricken 4.
[Amit Varma]: I don't know if you ever had a similar experience or rather at Wizarding, when I called up one
[Amit Varma]: of the famous spin quartet for quotes.
[Amit Varma]: And he said, tell me about vitamin M. Wow.
[Amit Varma]: And I said, what?
[Amit Varma]: And then I realized and I felt so sad, I felt like crying because yeah, a legend of the
[Amit Varma]: game.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And so it kind of strikes me that after this immense career, where he's been a hugely successful
[Amit Varma]: public intellectual, and all of that has happened, and he stood up against fascism and fascism
[Amit Varma]: has lost.
[Amit Varma]: And at the same time, communism is crumbling, and he's not crumbling, but has revealed his
[Amit Varma]: true face.
[Amit Varma]: And he's sort of in denial about that.
[Amit Varma]: Does one get a sense of sort of the human side of this great man, like one of the quotes
[Amit Varma]: I most loved in your book was when he talks about going to India.
[Amit Varma]: And he says, one of my reasons for settling in India was to avoid wearing socks, 60 years
[Amit Varma]: and socks is enough, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And I love that quote.
[Guest]: It gives such a great sense of the guy.
[Guest]: I mean, it's absolutely right.
[Guest]: The context, the broader context for his brokenness itself also should be explained, I feel, which
[Guest]: is, of course, the alimony is one part of it.
[Guest]: But all the money he made, he gave to his own university, the university that was supposed
[Guest]: to be paying him, he was giving money to the university to make sure that labs could remain
[Guest]: funded.
[Guest]: He once gave, he bought a set of teaspoons for 10 shillings for the men's staff room,
[Guest]: the men's teacher staff room in the university, because they had no teaspoons in the university.
[Guest]: This was a post-war period, University College London had been heavily bombed, you know,
[Guest]: the nearest tennis court, as I said, was 14 miles away, it was, it was just a complete
[Guest]: shell of itself and rebuilding was going on.
[Guest]: At this time, funds for doing science were quite limited.
[Guest]: And so he would, you know, he once gave 300, which was an eighth of his annual salary,
[Guest]: he gave back to the university to make sure his department could continue doing research.
[Guest]: So a lot of this money, the aspects of money that I talk about in the book are not for
[Guest]: personal enrichment, because he was a bizarrely low maintenance guy in that sense, you know,
[Guest]: all through his life, not just in India, where he was definitely sort of living a very simple
[Guest]: life, but even before that.
[Guest]: But I think he felt that there wasn't enough money for, to do the science that he wanted
[Guest]: to do.
[Guest]: And all of the money that he would get from writing articles, he would make over to some
[Guest]: grad student of his or to some lab, there are letters to that effect saying, listen,
[Guest]: I know you owe me this much money, can you make it over to University College London?
[Guest]: And similarly, for these, you know, this money that he asked for when he did interviews,
[Guest]: the money, the money was not for his own bank account, it was actually, so in that sense,
[Guest]: he was a remarkably uniform character throughout his life, he never cared, he was never fastidious
[Guest]: about himself.
[Guest]: He drove old beaten up cars, lived in almost slovenly mess, and continued to do that well
[Guest]: into India.
[Guest]: In fact, the thing that attracted him to India was, you know, you mentioned this line about
[Guest]: socks, which is a beautiful sort of bon mot, you just kind of tossed it away.
[Guest]: The thing that is inherent in it is that a certain simplicity of lifestyle is what attracted
[Guest]: him to the fact that, for example, you didn't need winter clothing, you could just sort
[Guest]: of go all year round in cottons and maybe one jacket or whatever it was when he was
[Guest]: living in Calcutta.
[Guest]: You didn't have to have expensive furniture, you didn't have in a relatively poor country,
[Guest]: he could live the sort of relatively poor lifestyle that he had always lived.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, no, and it also struck me and this is a complete aside that one of the letters you've
[Amit Varma]: quoted from him is where he's writing to Mahalonubis and he's saying that please forgive me for
[Amit Varma]: not being more productive.
[Amit Varma]: It's just too freaking hot, not in those words.
[Amit Varma]: But I just thought that my God, I think another thing that is unseen by most people is a massive
[Amit Varma]: difference that the invention of air conditioning has just made to humanity in general.
[Guest]: As Lee Kuan Yew said, it is the greatest invention of the 20th century, at least from the point
[Guest]: of view of Singapore and other Asian nations, because it transitioned them from being sort
[Guest]: of an economy that had to do work outside or not at all to be able to work indoors.
[Guest]: I mean, it's an entire lifestyle and professional change.
[Amit Varma]: It's just magnificent.
[Amit Varma]: My two great inventions are the AC and the jet spray.
[Amit Varma]: But yeah, so here's the thing, I read your book and in fact, I read it yesterday because
[Amit Varma]: I wanted to save it.
[Amit Varma]: You know, I bought it months ago when it came out, but I wanted to read it just before our
[Amit Varma]: conversation so it would be sharp in my memory and I absolutely loved it.
[Amit Varma]: It's so beautifully written and so many insights and I learned a lot from it.
[Amit Varma]: But my question to you to throw that back to you is in the process of writing it, A,
[Amit Varma]: how did your thinking about the world and society and perhaps science expand?
[Amit Varma]: And B, just about the craft of writing, I mean, you've written two excellent books before
[Amit Varma]: this mind you, which we didn't even mention.
[Amit Varma]: But in the sense that this was just such a different project also, how did your sense
[Amit Varma]: of you know, your own writing and the craft of writing in general, how did those end of
[Guest]: evolve?
[Guest]: Well, to answer the second question first, I mean, the writing was, as I mentioned earlier
[Guest]: on the podcast, it was an extremely interesting process because I had to depend on what I
[Guest]: read to make things vivid for the reader to bring this character to life who I'd never
[Guest]: met to get an insight into him and to write about him that word again, in an almost fictive
[Guest]: sense and convey him as a character and a person.
[Guest]: So you know, a lot of this was quite challenging.
[Guest]: When I was doing it for the first time, I would read extensively from other books that
[Guest]: I thought had done this well.
[Guest]: And you know, it took much longer to write as a book than either of my previous two books.
[Guest]: And partly that was down to the writing, partly also it was a material, I'm not a scientist,
[Guest]: you know, I haven't been trained as a biologist, certainly.
[Guest]: And so to understand a lot of the subjects that he worked on in the papers that he wrote,
[Guest]: I had to train myself, I mean, obviously not to the level of a scientist, but to the level
[Guest]: of somebody who could at least understand the science and simplify it.
[Guest]: And that involved very often talking to other scientists to get them to explain it to me
[Guest]: as if I was a first year college student, to read papers again and again, and to kind
[Guest]: of enough scientists, friends who I could call at a moment's notice to ask them, you
[Guest]: know, doubts about one thing or the other.
[Guest]: All of this was very different from my previous two books.
[Guest]: And then the act of boiling that science down itself is something else altogether.
[Guest]: I mean, it's something that I've never done before, because it's inherently more complex
[Guest]: and technical than the Sri Lankan civil war, for example.
[Guest]: So to constantly find real world examples, very much as Haldane did, in fact, to find
[Guest]: real world examples in his papers, or to find real world examples that his papers retrospectively
[Guest]: applied to, or went on to apply to, I mean, all of these things were challenges that I
[Guest]: set myself precisely for this purpose, because I felt that I'd never done this before.
[Guest]: And I wanted to see what the limits of my language and my prose and my writing were.
[Guest]: So that was really difficult.
[Guest]: And I think in terms of how I myself changed over the course of researching this book is,
[Guest]: well, I mean, we talked about this earlier, I mean, a lot of these thoughts and ideas
[Guest]: about the frailty of our political stances, and how contingent they are just on what we
[Guest]: are wedded to, you know, I've been thinking about that perhaps superficially even before.
[Guest]: And certainly events since 2014, have helped me clarify some of these a lot more, be the
[Guest]: events in India or in the UK or in the US.
[Guest]: But writing through this book helped me understand it from the point of view of something that
[Guest]: happened within one person's lifetime.
[Guest]: And kind of, you can look back on your life, but it's still only a limited life, you haven't
[Guest]: seen the full extent of your own life.
[Guest]: Whereas writing through someone like Haldane's life enabled me to see the whole thing in
[Guest]: its entirety.
[Guest]: And I grew immensely fond of him.
[Guest]: I mean, I can't say something, this is the most unusual thing, the most unexpected thing
[Guest]: that came out of this process.
[Guest]: You know, of course, everybody says, if you write a biography of somebody, you should
[Guest]: be fond of the person, it doesn't apply to people like Hitler.
[Guest]: But obviously, to spend that much time inside one person's mind, you are fond of them, I
[Guest]: agree.
[Guest]: But I told Ram Guha this, I said, like, you know, Ram, you never told me how sad a biographer
[Guest]: feels when he or she reaches the end of the subject's life.
[Guest]: It felt like somebody very close to me had died, and I was somehow witness to it and
[Guest]: not.
[Guest]: I wrote a small piece about this somewhere else about Haldane's handwriting, and so just
[Guest]: how I grew to adore it.
[Guest]: And how, you know, describing the end of his life felt to me, and this is a terrible example.
[Guest]: So I apologize in advance for anyone who has ever lost a child.
[Guest]: This is in no way comparing the scale of the two things.
[Guest]: But only in these two instances, do you see the entirety of a person's life from birth
[Guest]: to death, and be there to observe the death itself.
[Guest]: Of course, mine is in a much more sort of superficial case of the same, but I, you know,
[Guest]: you see the person being born, I saw JBS's sort of childhood letters, I saw the mistakes
[Guest]: he made when he was a kid, I saw how he was bullied when he was at Eton, I saw the person
[Guest]: he went on to become, I saw the mistakes he made in his personal and professional life.
[Guest]: And I saw the way he died.
[Guest]: When else do you ever get to experience this?
[Guest]: So there was a real sense of acute loss, I felt when I was writing that last scene when
[Guest]: he died, you know, and that again, sort of, there's so much about the biographical graph
[Guest]: that we can discuss, although you should probably talk to people who've written more than one
[Guest]: biography, but that I think, a real emotional charge to it that I didn't expect.
[Amit Varma]: That's quite moving. And I'll also, in the show notes, I'll link to this talk you gave
[Amit Varma]: on the book, which is on YouTube, where you have this fascinating slide, which has three
[Amit Varma]: handwritten letters by him at different points in time, it actually gets neater as it goes
[Amit Varma]: along. And I thought it'd be like a bell curve where the, you know, the middle one when he's
[Amit Varma]: this thing will be the best, but it's extremely lucid and readable at the end.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, maybe this is a reason Robert Caro hasn't yet finished his biography of
[Amit Varma]: Lyndon Johnson, he doesn't want to say goodbye to the guy.
[Guest]: Well, Robert Caro, I mean, I once had the extreme good fortune to sit next to him at
[Guest]: a dinner. And he told me about, you know, he was he was talking about the first book
[Guest]: and he said about how he didn't understand LBJ's background at all, sort of Texas and
[Guest]: small town Texas that he came out of. And he said, Well, so I only saw one solution
[Guest]: to this. And I said, What was that? He said, Well, I moved there. So what I moved there
[Guest]: for three years, he lived in a small town in Texas for three years, just to understand
[Guest]: that Texan background that LBJ would grow up in. So I mean, that kind of commitment
[Guest]: to the biographical craft is something else entirely.
[Guest]: Could you do that?
[Guest]: Oh, man, I mean, you know, look, if publishers are willing to pay me enough, I will go anywhere
[Guest]: to, you know, he was not being paid at that time, I have to point out, I mean, he was
[Guest]: still sort of, but this was just what he wanted to do. This is he had also been a journalist
[Guest]: for a while. And he decided he just wanted to get into the nuts and bolts of a person's
[Guest]: life to that level. It's really admirable.
[Amit Varma]: Samanth, I've taken enough of your time, I'll let you go now. But thank you so much for
[Amit Varma]: your time and your insights.
[Guest]: Thanks, Amit. This has been such a pleasure. And it's been great to catch up with you.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode, do hop on over to your nearest bookstore online
[Amit Varma]: or offline and pick up a dominant character, the radical science and restless politics
[Amit Varma]: of JBS Haldane. Samanth's previous books, Following Fish and This Divided Island are
[Amit Varma]: also worth your time. You can follow Samanth on Twitter at Samanth underscore s. You can
[Amit Varma]: follow me at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A. Do check out my writing course at indiancard.com
[Amit Varma]: slash clearwriting. Registrations for the August batch are now open. You can browse
[Amit Varma]: past episodes of The Scene and the Unseen at sceneunseen.in. Thank you for listening.
[Amit Varma]: Did you enjoy this episode of The Scene and the Unseen? If so, would you like to support
[Amit Varma]: the production of the show? You can go over to sceneunseen.in slash support and contribute
[Amit Varma]: any amount you like to keep this podcast alive and kicking. Thank you.